(CNN) -- Occupy London protesters who have been camped outside the landmark St. Paul's Cathedral for the past four months lost their court bid to avoid eviction Wednesday in a decision made by London's Court of Appeal.  Last month, the High Court ruled in favor of the City of London Corporation, the body that runs London's financial district, which applied for an eviction order after the protesters failed to abide by a previous order to pack up the camp.  The Occupy London group then filed an appeal against the ruling at the Court of Appeal.  Wednesday, the three judges of the court refused them the permission to appeal.  Michael Paget, the lawyer representing the Occupy London group, said the group doesn't intend to file another legal challenge.  "The occupy message has been heard and will continue to be heard. It has made a difference and will continue to make a difference."  The activists, who set up camp outside the cathedral October 15, had been protesting against corporate greed and economic inequality.  Many of the tents set up by the Occupy activists around St. Paul's are on what the corporation designates as a public road. St. Paul's suspended its own legal action against the activists in November, after a number of senior cathedral figures resigned over the threat to evict them.  "Peaceful protest is a democratic right but the camp is clearly in breach of highway and planning law," said Stuart Fraser, policy chairman for the City of London Corporation." I would call on protesters to comply with the decision of the courts and remove their tents and equipment voluntarily right away."
1 of 2. Israeli soldiers walk past signs pointing out distances to different cities at an observation point on Mount Bental in the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights May 5, 2013.U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on Sunday voiced alarm at reports Israel has struck targets inside Syria, but said the United Nations was unable to confirm whether any such attacks had taken place.  Without confirming that Israel was behind the attacks, the intelligence official said that the United States was essentially told of the air raids "after the fact" and was notified as the bombs went off.  Israeli jets bombed Syria on Sunday for the second time in 48 hours. Israel does not confirm such missions explicitly - a policy it says is intended to avoid provoking reprisals. But an Israeli official acknowledged that the strikes were carried out by its forces.  "It would not be unusual for them to take aggressive steps when there was some chance that some sophisticated weapons system would fall into the hands of people like Hezbollah," the U.S. intelligence official told Reuters, speaking on condition of anonymity.  While the air raids raised fears that America's main ally in the Middle East could be sucked into the Syrian conflict, Israel typically does not feel it has to ask for a green light from Washington for such attacks.  Officials have indicated in the past that Israel sees a need only to inform the United States once such a mission is under way.  U.S. President Barack Obama said on Saturday that Israel has the right to guard against the transfer of advanced weapons to Hezbollah, an ally of both Syria and Iran.  Rather than an attempt to tip the scales against Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, Israel's action is seen more as part of its own conflict with Iran, which it fears is sending missiles to Hezbollah in Lebanon through Syria. Those missiles might hit Tel Aviv if Israel makes good on threats to attack Tehran's nuclear program.  Another Western intelligence source told Reuters the latest attack, like the previous one, was directed against stores of Fateh-110 missiles in transit from Iran to Hezbollah.  People were woken in the Syrian capital by explosions that shook the ground like an earthquake and sent pillars of flames high into the night sky. Syrian state television said bombing at a military research facility at Jamraya and two other sites caused "many civilian casualties and widespread damage," but it gave no details. The Jamraya compound was also a target for Israel on January 30.  The U.S. intelligence official said additional strikes in the future could not be ruled out.  "Any sophisticated weaponry that finds its way there (Syria)that looks to be destined to fall in the hands of bad actors, I think there is a likelihood that those could be targets as well," the second official said.  Obama has repeatedly shied away from deep U.S. involvement in the Syrian conflict, which erupted in 2011 and has killed an estimated 70,000 people and created more than 1.2 million refugees.  Hours after the Israeli attacks, several U.S. lawmakers voiced concern over the mounting uncertainty in the Middle East.  Influential Republican lawmaker John McCain said Israel's air strikes on Syria could add pressure on the Obama administration to intervene, but the U.S. government faces tough questions on how it can help without adding to the conflict.  "We need to have a game-changing action, and that is no American boots on the ground, establish a safe zone and to protect it and to supply weapons to the right people in Syria who are fighting, obviously, for the things we believe," McCain said on "Fox News Sunday."  "Every day that goes by, Hezbollah increases their influence and the radical jihadists flow into Syria and the situation becomes more and more tenuous," he said.  U.S. Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel said last week that Washington was rethinking its opposition to arming the Syrian rebels. He cautioned that giving weapons to the forces fighting Assad was only one option, which carried the risk of arms finding their way into the hands of anti-American extremists among the insurgents.  The United States has said it has "varying degrees of confidence" that chemical weapons have been used in Syria on a limited scale, but is seeking more evidence to determine who used them, how they were used and when.
U.S. President Barack Obama waves to the media as he returns to the White House in Washington, after a day trip to Columbus, Ohio, where he delivered the commencement address at Ohio State University, May 5, 2013.  WASHINGTON (Reuters) - President Barack Obama will travel on Thursday to Austin, Texas, the first stop in a new series of day trips designed to draw attention to policies and programs that help spur the economy, and build support for his economic policies, the White House said on Sunday.  In Austin, Obama will visit a high school and a technology company, and will talk with entrepreneurs and workers about proposals he made earlier this year to boost jobs and training.  Despite often saying that his top priority is creating more jobs, Obama's proposals have been overshadowed by debates over reforms to gun and immigration laws as well as efforts to reduce the deficit.  Unemployment in the United States fell to 7.5 percent last month, the lowest level since Obama took office.  "Things are getting better, but our economic recovery is not as strong as it could be and far too many middle class families are still struggling," said Josh Earnest, Obama's deputy press secretary.  "There are things Washington could be doing right now to help American businesses, schools and workers," he said, explaining the tours are designed to engage Americans and push Congress to act.  In February, Obama said he wanted to invest in manufacturing "hubs" around the country, spend $50 billion on roads, bridges and other infrastructure, and raise the minimum wage to $9 per hour from the current $7.25.  Most of the proposals require Congressional approval, but there have been few signs of broad support for the measures on Capitol Hill.
U.S. Senator Marco Rubio (R-FL)(2nd L), part of the Senate's ''Gang on Eight'', speaks during a news briefing on Capitol Hill in Washington, April 18, 2013. Pictured alongside Rubio are some of the eight senators (L-R) Jeff Flake (R-AZ), Chuck Schumer (D-NY), John McCain (R-AZ), Michael Bennet (D-CO) and Dick Durbin (D-IL), who helped craft comprehensive legislation to overhaul the immigration system.  But since the bill was rolled out last week, a rift has emerged among conservatives that has played out in Senate hearings on Capitol Hill, on conservative talk shows and in social media such as Twitter and blogs.  The immigration effort has brought together an unusual coalition of Republicans, led by Florida Senator Marco Rubio, a potential 2016 presidential prospect, Arizona Senator John McCain, a former presidential candidate who has broken ranks with his party on some issues, and conservative anti-tax activist Grover Norquist.  But it has also put a spotlight on longstanding opposition to immigration reform within the party, potentially blunting the message party leaders had hoped to send in their efforts to remake the party's image, begun in earnest by the Republican National Committee after President Barack Obama swept to victory with 71 percent of the Hispanic vote in 2012.  Opponents of immigration reform include some traditional conservatives such as Senator Jeff Sessions of Alabama as well as some relative newcomers, including Texas Senator Ted Cruz, a Tea Party favorite. Another opponent of the immigration reform bill is Jim DeMint, a former South Carolina senator who is now president of the Heritage Foundation, a conservative think tank.  Luke Frans, executive director of Resurgent Republic, an organization that conducts polling and research for Republicans, said his group has met with Capitol Hill Republicans on the subject, advising them to avoid allowing the debate over immigration to become a "circular firing squad" in which Republicans are attacking their own.  "Conservatives have certainly seen in past debates where it's veered off the policy and become more of a personal tone. That's what we're really trying to avoid this time around," he said.  Critics of the legislation have labeled as "amnesty" a provision at the heart of the bill that would grant legal status to millions of undocumented immigrants. They also warn that the legislation would drive up the federal debt as immigrants eventually become eligible for federal benefits such as Social Security.  Supporters say providing legal status for the undocumented would bring people out of the shadows and ensure that they are working and paying taxes. Advocates also say the bill, which would establish new guest worker programs for both highly skilled and low-skilled workers, would boost the economy by making the labor market more flexible.  The debate is still in its early stages and many Republicans say the rancor is still far from the level that it reached in past immigration debates, such as one in 2006 and 2007 when criticism of comprehensive immigration reform on talk radio jammed phone lines at the Capitol.  But it may not be far beneath the surface either, to judge from some of the exchanges in the past week.  In a posting that highlighted the divisions among conservatives, Erick Erickson of the influential RedState political blog accused Rubio staffers and other supporters of the immigration bill of trying to paint critics as bigoted and racist.  Elsewhere, especially on Twitter, some conservative opponents of the immigration bill accused Rubio - falsely - of supporting the distribution of free phones to illegal immigrants.  Rubio has spent much of the last week appearing on conservative radio and TV stations to defend the legislation.  "We always realized that this was a complicated issue and that we were going to have to spend a lot of time explaining it," Rubio spokesman Alex Conant said. Conant described the response so far in conservative media as "mixed."  The bomb attack at the Boston Marathon last week that was allegedly carried out by two immigrant brothers of Chechen descent intensified the debate among Republicans over the immigration bill.  Some Republicans, including Senator Charles Grassley of Iowa and Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky, said the Boston attack, which killed three people and injured more than 250, were a reason to be cautious on immigration reform.  But other Republicans, including House of Representatives Speaker John Boehner and House Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan, argued that the Boston bombing showed the need to fix and modernize the immigration system.  While DeMint of the Heritage Foundation has been a vocal skeptic of the immigration reform bill, many of the scholars at two other influential conservative research organizations, the Cato Institute and the American Enterprise Institute, have been supportive of broad reform.  Charlie Black, a longtime adviser to Republican candidates who is now chairman of Prime Policy Group, a public affairs consulting firm, said the divisions among Republicans do not break down "along traditional lines" of conservative and moderate.  Whit Ayres, a Republican strategist who backs immigration reform, said Republican voters who may be skeptical of the effort are persuadable if proponents use the right message on immigration reform.  He said the strongest argument is that the current immigration system amounts to a "de facto amnesty" and that reforming the system is "better than anything (Democratic President) Barack Obama, left to his own devices, is likely to come up with."  Some conservative activists may be easier to persuade than others on immigration reform.  Chris Littleton of the Tea Party group Ohio Rising, said he did not understand what was behind all of the criticism of immigration reform.  "There are clearly employers who need low-cost labor and immigrants who want jobs, so there is clearly a functioning market here. Everybody's benefiting from the situation so I don't know why we need this debate," he said.  But David Crow of the Arkansas Conservative Caucus, another Tea Party group, said the proposed immigration bill would "simply create a magnet for more and more people to come across the border."  "In my opinion it is a huge mistake to go down this path when it's evident it will attract more and more illegal aliens," Crow added
1 of 5. Traders work on the floor at the New York Stock Exchange, May 1, 2013.  Financial shares led the way on Wall Street, with Bank of America (BAC.N) up 5.2 percent after it reached a settlement with bond insurer MBIA Inc. (MBI.N)  The euro fell against the greenback after European Central Bank President Mario Draghi said the bank, which cut interest rates last week, is watching economic data and is ready to take further action if needed.  Purchasing managers indexes on Monday showed recession dragged on euro zone companies and business growth flagged in China, adding to a report on Friday that U.S. corporate growth slowed in April.  Many analysts have expected a pullback in U.S. equities for weeks now, as the S&P 500 index continues to post historic highs. Wall Street has largely avoided a correction as traders have used weakness as an opportunity to add to long positions.  Monday's gains follow a strong run in stocks since the start of the year. Accommodating monetary policies that have kept interest rates low, as well as solid earnings, have helped lift the S&P 500 13.5 percent so far this year.  "Since the beginning of the year, the bulls have remained in control of this market," said Michael James, managing director of equity trading at Wedbush Securities in Los Angeles.  "As long as you continue to have decent earnings reports and support from the central banks, it will be hard to derail the market, at least in the short term."  U.S. employment rose more than expected in April, with 165,000 jobs created, and hiring was much stronger than thought in the previous two months, the U.S. government said on Friday. The report eased concerns raised by other data that had pointed to the U.S. economy losing steam.  The Dow Jones industrial average .DJI fell 5.07 points or 0.03 percent, to end at 14,968.89, the S&P 500 .SPX gained 3.08 points or 0.19 percent, to 1,617.5 and the Nasdaq Composite .IXIC added 14.34 points or 0.42 percent, to 3,392.97.  The MSCI world equity index .MIWD00000PUS edged up less than 0.1 percent, weighed by declines in some European stocks.  Brent crude futures settled up 1.2 percent at $105.46 as supply concerns followed Israeli air strikes on Syria on Friday and Sunday. Trading was choppy, however, as worries about the weak data from China and the euro zone sparked demand concerns.  "In another lifetime, the Israeli headlines would have sent the market screaming higher, but there does seem to be this malaise about economic contraction," said Stephen Schork, the editor of The Schork Report in Pennsylvania.  U.S. crude futures settled up 0.6 percent at $96.16.  The U.S. dollar rose for a third straight session against the yen and looked set to make another run at the 100-yen level after last week's surprisingly strong U.S. jobs data rekindled optimism about the U.S. economy.  The yen lost 0.3 percent to 99.37 per U.S. dollar, having hit 99.45, its weakest since April 25, according to Reuters data.  The euro also weakened against the greenback after Draghi's comments on possible further easing from the ECB, but stayed within last week's range. The euro zone single currency was recently down 0.3 percent at $1.3077.  U.S. Treasuries prices slipped as investors continued to digest Friday's better-than-expected jobs report, which sent yields surging to their highest in three weeks.  U.S. government bonds are expected to stay at the relatively higher yields as investors prepare for $72 billion in new supply this week. Benchmark 10-year Treasuries yielded 1.76 percent, up from 1.74 percent on Friday and up from 1.62 percent before the jobs data was released.  Billionaire investor Warren Buffett said in an interview with CNBC that the U.S. economy is gradually improving, but low interest rates have made bonds "terrible investments" while stocks remain "reasonably priced."  Gold edged lower in light trading, weighed by continued outflows in bullion-backed exchange-traded funds, and investors were still weighing the metal's inflation-hedge appeal after last week's encouraging U.S. jobs data.  Spot gold was recently down less than 0.1 percent at $1,469 per ounce.
A Google trademark is reflected in Apple logo in this photo illustration taken in Berlin, August 31, 2012.  BRUSSELS (Reuters) - The European Commission said it believed Motorola Mobility, a unit of Google, was abusing its market position by seeking and enforcing an injunction against Apple in Germany over patents essential to mobile phone standards.  The Commission said in a statement it had informed Motorola Mobility of its preliminary view in a charge sheet known as a statement of objections.  The Commission said injunctions could be used to combat patent infringements, but that was not the case where a potential licensee was prepared to agree on licensing terms.  "I think that companies should spend their time innovating and competing on the merits of the products they offer - not misusing their intellectual property rights to hold up competitors to the detriment of innovation and consumer choice," Competition Commissioner Joaquin Almunia said.  Almunia said earlier this year that regulators were considering charging more firms with anti-competitive practices in using injunctions to prevent rivals using their patents rather than negotiating fair fees.
The two countries packed up tents and left the disputed patch on the 5,000-metre-high (16,000-foot) Depsang Plain late on Sunday. But it had not been clear how far they had withdrawn.  Neither side has given details of the terms of the deal.  India says up to 50 Chinese soldiers intruded into its territory on the western rim of the Himalayas on April 15. Some officials and experts believe the incursion signaled Chinese concern about increased Indian military activity in the area.  Delhi had said the soldiers were 19 km (12 miles) beyond the point it understands to be the border with China in the Ladakh region of Kashmir, a vaguely defined de facto line called the Line of Actual Control, which neither side agrees on.  "The governments of India and China have agreed to restore status quo ante along the Line of Actual Control (LAC) in the Western Sector of the India-China boundary as it existed prior to 15 April, 2013." India's foreign ministry spokesman Syed Akbaruddin said in a statement.  He did not elaborate or say whether China's soldiers had already retreated the agreed distance, only saying that "flag meetings" between border commanders had been held "to work out the modalities and to confirm the arrangements".  On Sunday, an army officer from India's Northern Command told Reuters Indian troops had initially moved back 1 km, but that he did not know how far the Chinese had moved.  China's foreign ministry on Monday stopped short of saying the standoff had been resolved, but said the two countries had treated the situation from the perspective of their wider bilateral relations, which include important trade ties.  "Currently, based on my understanding, the friendly consultations between the relevant departments from both countries achieved positive progress," spokeswoman Hua Chunying told reporters at a daily press briefing.  Some experts and Indian officials say tensions are likely to persist as the area is highly strategic and abuts the Karakoram Highway joining Pakistan to China, which Beijing hopes to develop into a high-traffic trade route linking it to the Arabian Sea port of Gawadar.  Indian media, which had criticized the government's handling of the standoff, on Monday speculated that Delhi had agreed to Chinese demands that it dismantle some infrastructure in another disputed sector in order to defuse the standoff.  Akbaruddin said he could not give details of the deal.  Throughout the crisis, China denied it had crossed into Indian territory. Its soldiers displayed bright orange banners at the site which warned India's troops that they were in fact in Chinese territory, photos leaked by the Indian army showed.  The tensions had threatened to overshadow a visit by the Indian foreign minister to Beijing on May 9. China's Premier Li Keqiang is expected to visit India later this month.
1 of 3. Earthquake survivors work on the rubble of a mud house after it collapsed following the quake in Jalalabad province, April 24, 2013.  The 5.7 magnitude quake, which hit before 2 p.m. (0930 GMT) was felt as far away as the Indian capital New Delhi and was the latest in a spate of tremors to shake Asia this month.  The quake was 65 km (40 miles) deep with an epicenter 11 km (seven miles) from Mehtar Lam, capital of the eastern province of Laghman, according to the U.S. Geological Survey.  At least 18 people were killed in adjacent Nangarhar and Kunar provinces and the death toll was expected to rise, a spokesman for the Afghan Red Crescent Society said. Some 70 people were injured in Nangarhar alone.  Hundreds of homes collapsed across Kunar and Nangarhar.  Wednesday saw steady rain across most of Afghanistan, which would have weakened the mud-brick dwellings many Afghans live in, according to the National Disaster Management Authority.  The agency did not yet have its own casualty figures.  Rain also caused flash-flooding in the northern province of Balkh earlier on Wednesday, killing 15 people, provincial council member Fazel Hadidi said.  Buildings swayed in New Delhi and panicky people ran into the street in the disputed northern region of Kashmir, where an quake killed about 75,000 people in 2005, most on the Pakistan side. Wednesday's quake was also felt in the Pakistani capital Islamabad.  Last week, a 6.6 magnitude earthquake killed nearly 200 people in southwest China, a few days after another powerful tremor killed 35 people in Pakistan near the border with Iran.
(CNN) -- The case of a U.S. citizen sentenced to 15 years in a North Korean labor camp is not a "political bargaining chip," the North's state-run Korean Central News Agency reported Sunday.  Pae Jun Ho, known as Kenneth Bae by U.S. authorities, was arrested and prosecuted for various crimes aimed at "state subversion," KCNA said. It previously reported the Korean-American was arrested November 3 after arriving as a tourist in Rason City, a port in the northeastern corner of North Korea.  In prior instances, North Korea has released Americans in its custody after a visit by some U.S. dignitary.  But Bae's case could get caught up in the recent tensions between the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, as the North is formally known, and the United States.  "Whenever Americans were put under custody in the DPRK for violating the country's law, former or incumbent high-ranking American officials flew to Pyongyang and apologized for their crimes and promised to prevent the recurrence of similar incidents. Therefore, the DPRK showed generosity and set them free from the humanitarian point of view," KCNA reported, citing a foreign ministry spokesman.  "Pae's case proves that as long as the U.S. hostile policy toward the DPRK remains unchanged, humanitarian generosity will be of no use in ending Americans' illegal acts."  According to the report, Bae entered North Korea "with a disguised identity." He reportedly "confessed and admitted his crimes."  "Some media of the U.S. said that the DPRK tried to use Pae's case as a political bargaining chip. This is ridiculous and wrong guess.  "The DPRK has no plan to invite anyone of the U.S. as regards Pae's issue," read the KCNA report.  Last week, the United States demanded Bae's immediate release.  "You all are aware of the history and how this has happened in the past with U.S. citizens," State Department spokesman Patrick Ventrell told reporters in Washington. "But what we're calling for and we're urging the DPRK authorities to do is to grant him amnesty and to allow for his immediate release, full stop."  Ventrell said the State Department was still trying to confirm details of the case through Swedish diplomats who visited Bae last week. Sweden represents U.S. interests in North Korea because Washington has no diplomatic relations with Pyongyang.  U.S. officials have struggled to establish how exactly Bae ran afoul of North Korean authorities.  Bae's sister told CNN last week that her brother is the owner of a tour company and was in North Korea for work.  He'd traveled to the country previously with no problems and had no reason to suspect that this time would be different, said Terri Chung.  "You know, Kenneth is a good man; he's not a spy. He has never had any evil intentions against North Korea, or any other country for that matter," she told CNN's Anderson Cooper 360.  North Korea is considered to have one of the most repressive penal systems in the world. Human rights groups estimate that as many as 200,000 people are being held in a network of prison camps that the regime is believed to use to crush political dissent.  CNN's K.J. Kwon and Jethro Mullen contributed to this report.
Hong Kong (CNN) -- Poultry workers moving to and from wet markets and farms may be responsible for the spread of the deadly H7N9 virus in China, says a virologist who's working with the World Health Organisation to investigate the outbreak.  University of Hong Kong clinical virologist Malik Peiris told CNN the closure of Shanghai's poultry markets on April 6 had resulted in a sharp drop in the number of human cases in the city.  "That is clear evidence that the poultry markets are the primary source of human infection," he said.  Peiris, who visited regions hit by the virus as part of a joint WHO mission last month, added that studies of earlier H5N1 bird flu outbreaks in Hong Kong had shown that the virus can move between live poultry markets and clean farms through contaminated cages and other exposed items, and this was a likely explanation of how the virus was being transmitted around China.  "That's how this infection can keep on zigzagging in this way," he said.  Since H7N9 was first identified in March, 128 cases have been detected in 10 provinces and 26 people have died, according to figures released on May 2 by the WHO.  In addition to markets in Shanghai, China has also temporarily closed live poultry wholesale markets in Jiangsu, Fujian, Jiangxi, Anhui, Guangdong and Zhejiang provinces.  Health authorities are still investigating the possible sources of infection and Peiris said there was still much work to be done on how the virus had jumped to humans and how it was being spread.  WHO assistant director general Keiji Fukada said in a press conference in Beijing on April 24 that H7N9 was one of the most lethal influenza viruses seen so far and unusually dangerous for humans.  The international health body has stressed there is no evidence of sustained human-to-human transmission of the virus, but Peiris said that it was difficult to ascertain whether clusters of cases within the same family were the result of "limited human-to-human transmission or whether these people have been exposed to the same source" -- such as by visiting the same live poultry market.  A large-scale study of blood samples being conducted in China would shed light on whether there had been milder or undiagnosed cases of H7N9 in the wider population -- a key factor in determining the mortality rate, said Peiris, who played a key role in identifying the virus that caused SARS.  "Even if there is limited human-to-human transmission, that doesn't necessarily have any dire consequences because limited human-to-human transmission has been reported for a long time with H5N1."  The visible impact of the virus could also reduce as the hot summer weather approaches but it was unlikely to die out and might re-emerge in winter, Peiris added.  CNN's Fang Ke and Zhang Dayu contributed to this report from Beijing
(CNN) -- The white stretch Lincoln was headed across San Francisco Bay, carrying the bride-to-be and eight of her friends for a bachelorette party.  Five of them, including the bride, never made it across.  Somewhere on the seven-mile San Mateo-Hayward bridge, the limousine caught fire. The driver and four members of the bachelorette party got out, but the bride -- identified by a relative as 31-year-old Neriza Fojas -- and four others died in the burning limo Saturday night, the California Highway Patrol said.  "The flames were gigantic," said Roxanne Guzman, who was crossing the bridge with her husband and brother about 10 p.m. Saturday (1 a.m. Sunday ET). "The flames were so big and radiating so much heat that I could feel the heat off of my face, and I was in my car the entire time."  Guzman said the survivors appeared to be in a state of shock on the shoulder of the roadway, with three of them crying. Other passersby had stopped, but police and firefighters hadn't arrived yet, she said.  The driver was uninjured, but the four surviving women were treated for smoke inhalation, California Highway Patrol spokesman Ron Simmons said Sunday. The cause of the blaze was under investigation.  "Looking at the photos, it appears it started in the trunk," Simmons said. "But at this time, we don't know officially if the fire started inside the vehicle or on the exterior."  Lovela Nicolas, the sister-in-law of Fojas' sister, said Fojas was a registered nurse. The Fresno woman was slated to be married in June, and she and her friends had hired the Lincoln for her bachelorette party, Nicolas said.  "Neriza was getting married, going to Philippines to get married there and have ceremony there and the reception," Nicolas told CNN from her home in Honolulu.  The mother of one of the surviving women told CNN affiliate KTVU that her daughter, Mary Guardiano, was upset but physically OK.  "She's very sad. She is crying," said Rosita Guardiano.  In a written statement, the limousine company said it was "deeply saddened" by the deaths.  "LimoStop Inc. will do everything possible to investigate and assist authorities in determining the cause of this fire in order to help bring forth answers and provide closure to the victims and their families," it said.  Medical examiners may need up to two days to identify the remains, San Mateo County Deputy Coroner Roger Fielding said.  CNN's Jackie Castillo, Nick Valencia, Jake Carpenter and Justin Lear contributed to this report.
(CNN) -- A referee for a recreational soccer league who was punched in the face by a teenager has died, police in Salt Lake City said.  Ricardo Portillo, 46, was refereeing a game in the Salt Lake City suburb of Taylorsville on April 27 when he cited a player for an infraction and issued him a "yellow card."  In soccer, a yellow card is a caution to the player; a second results in his ejection from the game.  The decision, police say, prompted the 17-year-old player to turn around and punch Portillo in the face.  At first, authorities thought Portillo suffered only minor injuries from the assault.  But after he was taken to a hospital, doctors discovered he had suffered serious internal head injuries, police said.  For seven days, he remained in critical condition.  "He loved soccer," his daughter Johana Portillo told CNN's Jake Tapper on Friday. "We just never thought this was going to happen. He loved what he did and it was his passion."  She added: "The doctor says only a miracle will bring my daddy back."  On Saturday night, Portillo died from his injuries.  As for the teenager, he remains in juvenile detention.  Police initially charged him with aggravated assault. But with Portillo's death, authorities expect to upgrade the charges.  Officials have not released the teenager's name because he is a juvenile.  The incident took place during a game of Fut International, a Hispanic soccer league for children between ages 5 and 17.  League president Mario Vasquez told CNN affiliate KUTV he didn't know the suspect personally, but was not aware of other incidents involving the player.  But, he said, the league has a no-tolerance policy and kicks out players if they engage in violence toward each other, referees or parents.  The incident brings to mind a similar attack in the Netherlands in December.  In that incident, police charged two 15-year-olds and a 16-year-old who beat a 41-year-old linesman during an amateur soccer game.  The linesman's son was playing in the game when the incident occurred -- and witnessed the attack.  The linesman, Richard Nieuwenhuizen, fell into a coma and died the next day.
1 of 4. Jim Porter, First Vice President of the NRA, speaks during the National Rifle Association's Annual Meeting of Members in Houston, Texas on May 4, 2013. Organizers expect some 70,000 attendees at the 142nd NRA Annual Meetings & Exhibits in Houston, which began on Friday and continues through Sunday.  Porter, 64, the son of another Alabama lawyer who served as NRA president from 1959 to 1961, is likely to succeed David Keene on Monday in the two-year post at the nation's leading gun-rights organization.  The longtime member is chairman of the legal affairs committee for the NRA, which has headed off federal attempts to approve new gun ownership restrictions, including a U.S. Senate proposal last month for expanded background checks.  Porter told NRA members at their annual convention in Houston on Saturday that President Barack Obama was "AWOL" on border security, the deficit and national security, but "scheming and plotting" to take away Americans' gun rights.  "There is nothing, nothing that criminals do with guns that isn't already against the law," Porter said.  In a speech to the New York State Rifle & Pistol Association in June 2012, Porter called Obama a "fake" president and U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder "rabidly un-American."  The NRA's focus is far different now from what it was when Porter's father, Irvine Porter, led the organization. The NRA then focused mainly on shooting and hunting. Its emphasis shifted in later decades to lobbying against restrictions on guns.  Porter, the NRA's first-vice president, who by tradition is expected to be elected president on Monday by the board, introduced the outgoing president, Keene.  "If I have anything to say about it, you just heard from your next president of your National Rifle Association," Keene told the crowd..  Wayne LaPierre, the NRA's executive vice president and chief executive, remains the most visible leader of the group.  Keene told the Washington Times earlier this week that Porter would be a "perfect match" as NRA president as it focuses on court challenges to state laws restricting gun ownership.  "As we are likely to win most of the legislative battles in Congress, we will have to move to courts to undo the restrictions placed on gun owners' rights in New York, Connecticut, Maryland and Colorado," Keene told the newspaper.  Connecticut and New York expanded assault weapons bans and restricted the capacity of ammunition magazines after a gunman killed 20 students and six adults at a Connecticut school in December.  Colorado, where a gunman killed 12 people and wounded 58 others in July 2012 at a midnight showing of the Batman movie "The Dark Knight Rises," approved restrictions on the size of ammunition clips and universal background checks.  Porter, a 1971 graduate of the University of Alabama, told the New York group last year that the fight to protect the Second Amendment to the U.S. Constitution setting out the right to bear arms had just begun, and that Obama's "entire administration is anti-gun, anti-freedom, anti-Second Amendment."  On Saturday, Tom King, an NRA board member from East Greenbush, New York, said Porter was a likable family man and successful attorney who would be a good NRA president.  "I say things that are controversial too, everybody does," King said. "If you want to take something out of context and say, 'He said that, that's controversial,' and you want to attack him for that, that's your prerogative or anyone else's prerogative, but Jim is a good man."
Editor's note: Barbie Latza Nadeau is an American journalist and author based in Rome since 1996. She is a correspondent for Newsweek and The Daily Beast and author of the book Angel Face, about the Amanda Knox murder trial.  Rome, Italy (CNN) -- It doesn't take a social anthropologist to see that Italians truly love a lot about American culture. It is evident everywhere, from the popularity of Coca-Cola and Levi's to the prevalence of American music and movies.  But for all they like about American culture, it's fair to say Italians are getting a little weary of the American attitude -- especially when it comes to justice.  Italians point to a number of high-profile cases over the years in which they say American suspects have been accused of wrongdoing and criminal acts, but have been let off lightly. These cases leave Italians with the feeling that it's possible for Americans to get away with murder.  In 1998, a U.S. Marine Corps jet on a low-level training flight sliced through steel wires supporting a cable car near the ski resort of Cavalese in the Italian Alps, sending a gondola plunging to the ground. All 20 people inside the gondola were killed.  Italian prosecutors wanted the crew of the jet tried in Italy, but an Italian court ruled they should face court-martials in the U.S., in accordance with NATO treaties. The aircraft's pilot and navigator were found not guilty of involuntary manslaughter, even though the military admitted the plane had been flying lower and faster than authorized.  The defense argued that the incident was a tragic accident caused partly by the fact that the plane's altimeter was not working and the gondola cable that the plane hit was not on the map that he was given.  When it emerged a video that captured the accident from inside the plane had been destroyed, they were dismissed from the Marine Corps.  Italians were outraged, referring to the incident as the "massacre of Cermis." For years, many from the local resort area held anti-American protests on the anniversary of the accident.  In another incident that raised tensions, Egyptian cleric Abu Omar was seized off the streets of Milan in 2003, and smuggled to Egypt, where he says he was tortured and released four years later.  Although Italy did not request the extradition of any of the suspects, 22 CIA agents were convicted in absentia of the kidnapping and sentenced to prison time for their role in the abduction, but none ever served time in Italy.  They were also ordered to pay $1.5 million to Omar's family, who have received nothing so far. Italians were outraged that Americans could conduct military-style operations on Italian soil, especially involving kidnapping and torture, and go unpunished.  Other cases involving the two nations have been equally controversial. In 2009, American troops opened fire at a Baghdad airport checkpoint, killing Italian secret service agent Nicola Calipari and wounding a just-freed Italian hostage, journalist Giuliana Sgrena, whom Calipari was trying to spirit out of the country.  An Italian judge acquitted a U.S. soldier accused of killing Calipari, saying Italy had no jurisdiction in the case, and Italy did not request extradition. But the case is still a sensitive topic in Italy, where Calipari is considered to be a national hero killed by trigger-happy Americans.  The trial of Seattle student Amanda Knox, accused of killing her British roommate Meredith Kercher in November 2007 when the two shared a house in Perugia, Italy, is also controversial.  Knox and her erstwhile lover Raffaele Sollecito were famously convicted of Kercher's murder and sentenced to 26 and 25 years respectively in 2009. That conviction was sensationally overturned in 2011 and Knox went back to Seattle. The acquittal was then overturned by Italy's high court in March 2013, meaning Knox currently stands convicted of Kercher's murder and her appeal will likely be heard early next year.  Suspects are not required to attend court hearings in Italy, so Knox does not need to return to stand trial, at least in the short term. But if her original conviction is upheld on appeal and confirmed by Italy's high court, she would almost certainly face extradition orders to return to Italy to serve time for Kercher's murder.  It could be years before a final decision is reached in the Knox case, and undoubtedly Knox's legal team would fight extradition on every level if her conviction is upheld. In the meantime, Italians assume Knox will never set foot in Italy again, whether she is ultimately found responsible of Kercher's murder or not.  "She will never come back here, whether she should legally or not," the Kercher family lawyer Francesco Maresca told CNN. "There are too many case precedents that clearly show America does not easily surrender its criminals."  READ MORE: Amanda Knox: I wanted to come back from Italy stronger and surer of myself  READ MORE: What Amanda Knox can and can't tell us  READ MORE: Amanda Knox: I wanted to come back from Italy stronger and surer of myself
Sao Paulo, Brazil (CNN) -- Police in Rio de Janeiro on Monday were searching for an armed man who robbed passengers and raped a woman on a moving bus.  Police said the crimes occurred Friday evening in a poor suburb west of the city center known as Favela do Muquico.  The attack reinforces the need for more security in a city that will host of high-profile events, starting with a visit by Pope Francis in July for World Youth Day. Rio will also host matches in the 2014 World Cup and the Olympic Games in 2016.  In late March, an American tourist was gang-raped and brutally beaten aboard a minibus in the touristy Copacabana area of Rio.  According to a police report, in the latest incident, the man robbed passengers and forced them to the front of the bus. He then raped a woman and beat her with a gun.  Passengers told police that the man appeared to be under the influence of drugs. He ran out of the bus after about 30 minutes.  Police are using camera images from inside the bus and witness reports to try to identify and arrest the man.  The attack reinforces the need for more security in a city that will host high-profile events, starting with a visit by Pope Francis in July for World Youth Day. Rio will also host matches in the 2014 World Cup and the Olympic Games in 2016.  In late March, an American tourist was gang-raped and brutally beaten aboard a minibus in the touristy Copacabana area of Rio.  Robberies are not uncommon on public transport in Rio, but the violence of these attacks has shocked residents.
Tripoli, Libya (CNN) -- Lawmakers in Libya passed a law on Sunday banning senior Gadhafi government officials from holding official posts.  The move comes after a week of rising tensions in the Libyan capital of Tripoli as heavily armed protesters surrounded the Foreign and Justice ministries demanding that the legislature pass the law.  The political isolation law could exclude current senior officials such as the head of the General National Congress Mohamed al-Magariaf, who served as ambassador to India in the 1970s before he joined the exiled opposition to the Gadhafi government. The General National Congress is Libya's parliament.  It remains unclear if Prime Minister Ali Zaidan, who was a diplomat in India around the same time, would be affected by the ban.  The law, which would be implemented by a committee that would decide whether officials fall under the exclusion criteria, goes into effect in 30 days.  But the law has already come under fire by international watchdog groups.  "(The law) violates human rights and Libya's provisional constitution because it allows for guilt by association rather than provable misdeeds. The provisions and procedures for exclusion are overly broad and vague. The desire to ban corrupt and abusive officials is understandable, but this law is deeply flawed," said Hanan Salah, Human Rights Watch's Libya researcher.  Soon after the law was passed, Libyans broke into cheers as hundreds congregated outside the GNC, celebrating what many described as a victory. Celebratory gunfire rang across many areas of Tripoli as people drove around the city honking their horns and chanting in celebration.  Outside the Justice Ministry, armed protesters played music and danced as they prepared to sacrifice a camel, a Libyan tradition.  In March armed protesters surrounded the GNC for several hours in an attempt to force lawmakers to pass the law. They later opened fire on the car of Magariaf, who escaped unharmed.  There were concerns on Sunday of a repeat of these events if lawmakers had not come to an agreement.  The siege of government ministries seems to have ended with the passing of the law, but many Libyans are concerned about the implications of the vote.  "The events of last week have set a number of precedents -- the precedent that using arms to force the government to adopt a law or policy; the precedent of establishing non-equality of citizenship before the law, in effect creating classes of Libyans; and the principle that in the New Libya, people can and will be judged on the bases of general classification, not individual responsibility," said Hafed al-Ghwell, a former Gadhafi opposition figure and a Libya analyst.
Islamabad, Pakistan (CNN) -- A blast Monday near a political rally left 18 people dead in a Pakistan tribal region, a local government official said.  The strike occurred in the Kurram district, Riaz Khan said, and also wounded at least 56 people. Khan said the blast was detonated remotely and 10 kilograms of explosives were used.  The explosion occurred during a rally staged by the Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam-Fazal Ur Rehman group, a right-wing religious party with sympathies for the militant Taliban movement.  The incident occurred as Pakistanis prepare to go to the polls Saturday for national elections.  The Pakistani Taliban claimed responsibility. It said it attacked because one of the candidates, Munir Orakzai, has handed over members of the mujahedeen to the United States.  "We will never forgive him nor leave him alive," a statement from Pakistani Taliban spokesman Ihsan Ullah Ihsan said.  Jan Achakzai, a spokesman for Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam-Fazal Ur Rehman, said more than 2,000 people were attending the rally. Dr. Anayatur Rehman, who works at the hospital that received the bodies, said 18 people died.  Achakzai said more than 50 people were injured and two candidates received minor injuries.  "We will continue our politics of peace and reconciliation in Pakistan's tribal region despite these cowards' attacks," Achakzai said.  Violence has marred the run-up to the elections.  The anti-Taliban Awami National Party and the Muttahida Quami Movement and their personnel also have been targeted recently.  Maulana Fazal Rahman, the head of Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam-Fazal Ur Rehman, condemned the attack and said it prompted him to underscore the importance of national unity and deplore sectarian hatred.  "We cannot replace Sunnis with Shias, nor Shias with Sunnis, but we can remove hatred between various sects, ethnicities, linguistic groups," he said.
Hong Kong (CNN) -- Malaysia's ruling party has extended its decades-long grip on power after one of the country's most hotly contested parliamentary votes.  Prime Minister Najib Razak's Barisan Nasional coalition has ruled Malaysia for 56 years. Razak, the son and nephew of former prime ministers, has been in office since 2009 and appears to have won a new mandate in Sunday's vote, according to results from Malaysia's electoral commission, which reported the coalition won 133 seats in parliament.  Razak's leading challenger, Anwar Ibrahim, and his Pakatan Rakyat party -- which won 89 seats, according to the commission -- have not yet conceded the vote, however, alleging widespread vote-rigging before and during the election.  Turnout was high, with the election commission saying 80% of eligible Malaysians have voted. The weeks leading up to Sunday's poll saw reports of firebombs, texted death threats and beatings. Just days before polling booths opened, the potential for voter fraud was being alleged after reports that indelible ink used to mark the fingers of advance voters was washing off with water.  "The whole purpose of introducing indelible ink is to cut off multiple voters -- that is now being compromised by low quality ink," said Maria Chin Abdullah from BERSIH 2.0, which campaigns for electoral reform.  "The election commissioner had the cheek to tell us they forgot to shake the bottle. How ridiculous can that be, right?"  In a bid to end the claims, Malaysia's election commissioner staged a public demonstration Thursday to prove his assertion that the ink could not in fact be washed off.  Other allegations surfaced Sunday, with Ibrahim's party and election observers alleging the government exchanged cash for votes and brought in foreigners to cast their ballots in favor of Barisan Nasional.  The ruling coalition disputed the allegations and said the vote was free and fair.  Ibrahim, a former finance and deputy prime minister, served time in prison on corruption and sodomy charges which he says were politically motivated. The first sodomy charge was overturned in 2004 and in January 2012 he was acquitted of a second charge of sodomy, a serious offense in Malaysia which carries a sentence of up to 20 years in prison.  In a hard-fought campaign, both parties tried to entice voters with promises of generous government spending, though analysts say it's ultimately a choice between old and new, the status quo and an untested opposition.  "Both manifestos actually do not contain anything policywise; there are just little giveaways, they promise you this, promise you that but there's not much policy difference between both of them," said James Chin, professor of political science at the Malaysian campus of Australia's Monash University.  Bubbling under the surface is racial tension that has divided the country ever since Barisan Nasional introduced policies in the 1970s to favor ethnic Malays. The country's constitution effectively splits the country between Bumiputera, or ethnic Malays, and natives of Sarawak and Sabah, and citizens of mostly Chinese or Indian descent.  According to the CIA World Factbook, just over 50% of the country is Malay, while Chinese make up 23.7% and Indians 7.1%.  There are set government quotas on how much of the country's wealth should be held by Bumiputera. They are entitled to discounts on housing and must be offered enough stock in a company if it wants to be listed on the stock exchange.  The policy has created discontent that the opposition harnessed in its campaign, saying the policies must be reformed to create a more open society. But one analyst said a PR win would not mean wholesale change.  "Anwar and Pakatan Rakyat are realistic enough to know that if they try to change the foundation of the state then the Malays won't vote for them. They will fine-tune the system so that the system reflects more on need rather than race," Chin said.  What's important to voters, says BERSIH's Chin, is whether the election is perceived to be free and fair.  "It's not just the results, people are judging them on whether there is going to be any fair play," she said. "If there is none, people will be very angry. I'm not sure what the people will decide to do -- it is really up to the people to take charge."  A poll released by the University of Malaya Centre of Democracy and Election last week suggested that more than 60% of voters surveyed favored Pakatan Rakyat. However, the government dismissed the poll and said its own survey showed it was out in front, according to local news websites.  Chin of Monash University said voters' response to a potential Barisan Nasional victory will depend on how many of the 222 federal seats it can win.  "If Najib gets within the range of 140 to 150 (seats) people will just give him the benefit of the doubt. But if he goes above 180 they will be demonstrating in the streets. The population will not accept that he has a majority," he said.  The rate and severity of election-related attacks escalated since parliament was dissolved on April 3.  On Thursday, Human Rights Watch urged both coalition parties to "rein in their supporters," who it said had graduated from egg-throwing and paint-smearing to physical assaults and bomb attacks.  And along with the violence, the group said that cyberattacks had been directed at a number of Malaysian news websites, restricting access to reporting on the election within the country.  "Ensuring everyone can access information without interference is critical if there is to be a level political playing field in Malaysia," said Phil Robertson from Human Rights Watch. "The government has a duty to investigate and shut down all cyberattacks, interference with ISPs, and hacking so that freedom of expression and the right to receive information is preserved."  Foreign investors were anxious about the election outcome because despite concerns about Malaysia's gaping fiscal deficit, the country's economy has performed relatively well amid the global slowdown.  The World Bank expects Malaysia's GDP to grow 5% this year, boosted by capital projects and domestic spending, as citizens make use of civil servant wage increases and government handouts.
(CNN) -- Saudi Arabian girls will be officially allowed to practice sports in private schools for the first time, according to an education ministry announcement reported in the nation's official press agency.  The new regulations for physical education, announced Saturday, require that girls "dress modestly" and have appropriate equipment and facilities, and that female Saudi teachers have priority to supervise these activities.  "(This decision) stems from the teachings of our religion, which allows women to practice such activities in accordance with sharia," Education Ministry spokesman Mohammed al-Dakhini told SPA.  This is the first official government sanction of women's sports in schools, but some Saudis say it is not as momentous a decision as it may seem.  "This is not a big deal," said blogger Eman al-Nafjan, who writes about Saudi women's issues. "Private schools already have a physical education program, and the government knows about them. My daughter and niece both go to separate well-known private schools, and they both have sports programs."  Al-Nafjan says that although the announcement will not change anything for private school students, the decision itself could be a barometer for the introduction of sports into public girls' schools that do not have physical education programs.  "My speculation is that this might be a feeler to see if there's any backlash from society," al-Nafjan said. "Over the last few years, there have been several attempts to incorporate physical education into public schools, but they met with a lot of resistance. I think they're trying to gauge if society is more receptive or if there is still resistance."  Saudi Arabia has been taking steps to reform its view on women and sports. The ultraconservative kingdom fielded its first female athletes at the London Olympics last summer, and discussions under way could lead to women's private sports clubs being allowed to formally register with the Ministry of Sport.  The decision to send women to the Games was a rare concession in a kingdom where they are banned from driving. They cannot vote or hold public office, though that will change in 2015.  Women in Saudi Arabia also cannot marry, leave the country, go to school or open bank accounts without permission from a male guardian, usually the father or husband. Much of public life is segregated by gender.
(CNN) -- A Minnesota man arrested after investigators found weapons and explosives in his home was scheduled to appear in federal court in St. Paul Monday afternoon.  Buford "Bucky" Rogers was arrested Friday after a search of his Montevideo, Minnesota, home turned up several explosives including Molotov cocktails and a suspected pipe bomb, according to the affidavit written by an FBI agent. The agent said firearms also were discovered including a Romanian AK-M assault rifle. Rogers, a convicted felon, was arrested on a charge of illegally possessing a gun.  "The FBI believes that a terror attack was disrupted by law enforcement personnel and that the lives of several local residents were potentially saved," the FBI said in a press release.  However, several law enforcement officials played down the possible threat.  One law enforcement official said the suspect in the case had anti-government views and called the case a domestic terrorism investigation. The official added this is not a matter involving any international terrorism groups such as al Qaeda.  According to court documents, Rogers told investigators he had fired the assault rifle at a gun range on two separate occasions. The court papers say Rogers, 24, is a felon legally barred from possessing firearms because he was convicted of third-degree burglary in 2011.  The documents do not provide any information on what Rogers allegedly intended to do with the explosives and guns. There also is no mention of what led law enforcement officers to search Rogers' home.
(CNN) -- As one bombing suspect recovers in a prison hospital and cemeteries reject the body of the other, a whirlwind of new developments are swirling around the investigation into the Boston Marathon bombings.  Here are five major developments that took place over the weekend and what's expected to happen next in the case:  One of the three friends accused of helping Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, the younger of the two suspects, cover up his alleged crime is due in court for a bail hearing Monday.  Robel Phillipos, 19, is accused of making false statements to federal investigators during a terrorism investigation. If convicted, he could go to prison for eight years and be fined as much as $250,000.  Phillipos and two mutual friends met at Tsarnaev's dorm room the night authorities released photos of the bombing suspects, according to an FBI affidavit. Tsarnaev texted one of the friends, saying he could "come to my room and take whatever you want."  Tsarnaev wasn't in his dorm room, but his roommate let the friends in.  Phillipos first denied to investigators ever going to the dorm room, then later changed his story, the affidavit states.  While watching a movie, one or more of the friends spotted a backpack, according to the statement. Inside, Phillipos noticed about seven tubular fireworks, each between 6 and 8 inches long. The fireworks' powder had been taken out.  The three friends left with the backpack and laptop, the FBI affidavit states. The backpack was thrown in a trash bin and ended up in a New Bedford landfill, only to be found six days later.  FBI: How Dzhokhar Tsarnaev's friends took, trashed key pieces of evidence  For two weeks, no one claimed the body of Tamerlan Tsarnaev, the elder bombing suspect who died the night he and his brother led police on a wild chase.  Now, the funeral home holding his remains is struggling to find a place to bury him.  The brothers' parents in Dagestan have said they will not fly his body back to Russia for burial, spokeswoman Heda Saratova said.  And Cambridge City Manager Robert W. Healy said he would not allow Tsarnaev to be buried in the city if requested by the funeral director or Tsarnaev's family.  "The difficult and stressful efforts of the citizens of the City of Cambridge to return to a peaceful life would be adversely impacted by the turmoil, protests, and widespread media presence at such an interment," Healy said in a statement Sunday.  Explaining his decision, he cited an excerpt from Massachusetts state law saying that "it shall be the duty of the city manager to act as chief conservator of the peace within the city."  "I have determined that it is not in the best interest of 'peace within the city' to execute a cemetery deed for a plot within the Cambridge Cemetery for the body of Tamerlan Tsarnaev," Healy said.  Tsarnaev's body now lies at Graham Putnam & Mahoney Funeral Parlors in Worcester, west of Boston.  Peter Stefan, owner of the funeral home, said three cemeteries he's contacted said they feared reprisals. If he can't find a gravesite, Stefan said he plans to ask the government to find one.  The funeral home owner said everyone deserves to be buried.  "This is what we do in a civilized society, regardless of the circumstances," he said.  3. $28 million to go to victims  On Monday, officials from The One Fund Boston will unveil a tentative plan to distribute roughly $28 million to bombing victims and their families.  Representatives will hold town hall meetings Monday and Tuesday in Copley Square to discuss the plan.  Kenneth Feinberg, administrator of The One Fund Boston, told CNN's Don Lemon that while the amount of money might sound substantial, "you have to dampen expectations."  "I doubt anyone will be made whole by these allocations," he said.  "No amount of money distributed fairly quickly over the next month or two is going to provide the type of long-term financial stability" needed by a double-amputee or somebody hospitalized with a brain injury, Feinberg said. "There's just not enough money for those purposes."  Federal authorities on Sunday searched Tamerlan Tsarnaev's apartment, the home he shared with his wife, Katherine Russell, and their young daughter.  It was not immediately clear whether investigators had taken anything from the apartment Sunday.  But on Friday, a source briefed on the investigation said law enforcement officials found explosives residue in the small apartment.  The source said the residue turned up in at least three places: the kitchen table, the kitchen sink and the bathtub.  Dzhokhar Tsarnaev has said the two brothers built the bombs in the apartment, U.S. law enforcement officials briefed on the investigation have said.  Russell, the widow, has remained largely out of view since her husband's death, staying in her parents' Rhode Island home.  Her attorney, Amato DeLuca, said the 24-year-old knew nothing about plans to bomb the race, and reports of her husband's involvement came as an "absolute shock" to Russell and her family.  Amir Ismagulov, the father of Azamat Tazhayakov, said his son was simply at the wrong place at the wrong time with the wrong people.  Tazhayakov and Dias Kadyrbayev, both 19, are accused of obstruction of justice after allegedly removing the laptop and backpack from Dzhokhar Tsarnaev's room.  If convicted, they could face up to five years in prison and a $250,000 fine.  Tazhayakov's father, who lives in Kazakhstan, told CNN in New York that he met with his son last week for about 40 minutes.  Both father and son believe in the U.S. justice system, Ismagulov said. The government will get to the bottom of what happened and let Tazhayakov go, the father said in Russian.  Teenagers sometimes do stupid things, Ismagulov said, stressing that his son didn't know he was doing anything wrong.  CNN's Eric Fiegel, Greg Botelho and Rob Frehse contributed to this report.
(CNN) -- Internet shoppers could be one step closer to having to pay sales taxes on online purchases.  The U.S. Senate is expected to pass the the Marketplace Fairness Act in a vote on Monday, which will require all online retailers to collect sales taxes for the states where they ship goods.  The legislation will still need to pass the Republican-controlled House before it can become a law. White House spokesman Jay Carney has said that President Obama supports the bill.  Why is there no online sales tax now?  Until now, online shoppers have enjoyed buying items from e-commerce sites mostly sales-tax free. That's because older laws require stores to collect sales tax only on goods shipped to states where they have a physical presence, such as a distribution center or a physical store.  The primary reason for not requiring sales taxes for products sold across state lines is that it was just too complicated. Having to juggle the various sales tax laws and amounts for all 45 states that have sales tax was seen as a burden on businesses.  States that collect sales tax often have different rates depending on the type of goods being sold. Alcohol might have a higher sales tax rate while some goods like groceries dental equipment can be tax free. Within a state, cities and counties can charge additional taxes.  The most recent Supreme Court ruling that addressed the issue was in 1992, when Internet commerce was non-existent and computer software not as advanced.  Advocates for the online sales tax argue that current technology makes it possible to simplify and automate the task of collecting sales taxes for various states. Under the Marketplace Fairness Act, state governments that want to collect the tax will have to provide companies with free software for calculating taxes and set up one state entity to receive the payment.  Wait, aren't we required to pay sales tax already?  In most states with sales taxes, people who buy goods online (or over the phone or through the mail) from another state are subject to a Use Tax. They are supposed to keep track of everything they purchase and pay sales taxes when they file their tax return. Many consumers either ignore or are not aware of these requirements, and states say it is difficult to enforce.  Because people are already technically required to pay for unpaid sales tax, proponents of the bill argue that it isn't a new tax at all but a more efficient way of enforcing existing tax laws.  Who wants this tax?  The bill's supporters include big box retailers like Target, the National Retail Federation, e-commerce powerhouse Amazon, small brick and mortar business, a mix of republicans and democrats and President Obama.  Proponents say it will level the playing field for online and physical stores. Large retailers like Target have physical stores in most states and are already required to collect sales taxes for online sales. They argue that online-only retailers have an unfair advantage.  Until recently, Amazon was firmly against the online sales tax. But as the retailer has grown it's become interested in expanding its physical operations into more states, making the way for faster and same-day delivery of goods. Now the company is a big supporter of the law, which will help it stay competitive against other online-only retires as it moves into more states.  Online marketplace eBay is leading the charge against the tax, which could impact its many sellers who do more than $1 million in out-of-state sales annually. In a letter to eBay sellers, CEO John Donahoe suggested the law should exempt any business with fewer than 50 employees or that make less than $10 million a year on out-of-state sales.  Conservatives and anti-tax activists are also against the law and claim it will hurt online businesses. Smaller businesses that make more than the $1 million threshold claim it could still be costly to integrate a new accounting system, even with the proposed simplifications.  How much money will this bring in?  There were $225.5 billion in online sales in 2012, according to the U.S. Department of Commerce. States lost out on a combined $23 billion in uncollected sales tax revenue according to estimates from the National Conference of State Legislators.  What about states with no sales tax?  Five states currently have no state-wide sales tax: Alaska, Delaware, Montana, New Hampshire and Oregon. People who live in a state without sales tax won't be charged on goods they have shipped to their home state. However, businesses based in these states will have to collect sales taxes for items shipped to other places where there are sales taxes.  How much will I pay?  People in states that do have sales tax will pay the same amount of sales tax as you would buying an item in person at a local store. Sales tax rates are complicated and vary according to the type of product. To find out how much something will cost under this new law, choose a location and tax category on Tax Cloud's interactive map.  It will be possible to avoid sales taxes by buying from small out-of-state retailers making less than $1 million a year and not reporting use taxes when you file taxes.  When will it go into effect?  You don't need to start stockpiling goods from your favorite online stores just yet. There are still a few hurdles before states can start collecting sales tax on online purchases. The earliest it could go into effect is October 1, 2013.  After the vote on Monday, the bill will have to pass the House where it could face more resistance that it did in the Senate. If it does become a law, individual states will still have to meet some requirements before they can compel companies to pay state sales tax. They must simplify their tax processes and creating a single entity for collecting state taxes.  Twenty two states have already begun the process as part of the Streamlined Sales and Use Tax Agreement, which is a move by states to simplify their tax laws and regulations.
New York (CNN) -- Some families of 9/11 victims are outraged over the National September 11 Memorial Museum's decision to charge admission for visitors.  Sally Regenhard, assistant chairwoman of the group 9/11 Parents and Families of Firefighters and WTC Victims, called the fee a "slap in the face" on Sunday.  "Patriotic people from all corners of the country go to teach their children something and show respect, and now they will be faced with this fee? It is outrageous," she said.  "This feeds the idea of New York City being money-hungry. It is taking advantage of tourists," Regenhard said. "Making people pay to grieve is going to prevent people from paying their respects and learn about the victims."  9/11 Memorial communications manager Anthony Guido said that an exact price has not yet been set, but it will range from $20 to $25. Family members of 9/11 victims are exempt from all memorial-museum fees and charges, Guido said. The museum will open in 2014.  According to Guido, 9/11 museum officials looked to other institutions in the country for guidance on admission charges, such as the Oklahoma City National Memorial & Museum, which charges $12 for adults.  The memorial-museum declined to comment on Regenhard's statements.  But not all family members of 9/11 victims agree with Regenhard.  Charles Wolf told CNN affiliate WCBS: "I think if it's necessary, they need to do it, because I want this museum to be good. We've taken a horrible, horrible disaster -- in which my wife was lost -- and we're making it better."
(CNN) -- A Texas group run by a self-described anarchist has posted what appears to be the first video of the live firing of a handgun created with a 3-D printer.  The 53-second video shows a single shot being fired from The Liberator, a plastic handgun that, with the exception of its metal firing pin, was assembled from parts made with a 3-D printer, according to Defense Distributed. The gun appears unscathed after the test firing, although the brief clip does not reveal anything about its range or accuracy.  The nonprofit group, founded by 25-year-old law student Cody Wilson, has posted instructions for the gun online so other people can duplicate it. The gun was created with a Stratasys Dimension SST printer, which can be purchased online for as little as $8,000.  Wilson fired the gun Saturday and the video was posted to YouTube on Sunday. The group's self-described "Wiki Weapon Project" is about a year old. Until now, the group had only reported being able to make plastic, interchangeable parts for firearms, but not entire weapons.  The Liberator is comprised of 16 interchangeable pieces, with a nail for a firing pin. According to the group, the barrel can be changed out to fire different kinds of ammo.  Not surprisingly, reports of the test-firing have reignited calls to ban 3-D-printed guns, which critics fear could easily fall into the wrong hands and create safety concerns because they'd be invisible to metal detectors.  New York Sen. Charles Schumer is one of several politicians pushing for stricter legislation that would ban firearms created with 3-D printers.  "Passing this law would not only prevent people from making these parts, it would raise awareness on the issue," Schumer said Sunday during a news conference. "We're facing a situation where anyone -- a felon, a terrorist -- can open a gun factory in their garage."  Schumer is joined by U.S. congressman Steve Israel of New York, who has introduced legislation to renew a ban on plastic guns that is set to expire later this year.  "I don't want to make it easier for criminals and terrorists to bring plastic guns through metal detectors and onto airplanes," he told CNN's Jake Tapper on Monday.  It's an argument unlikely to sway Wilson, who has made no secret of his disdain for the U.S. government in particular and all governments in general. (Defense Distributed makes and sells components with names like "The Cuomo" and "The Pelosi," to tweak politicians who support gun control).  "For me, it's important as a symbolic political statement," he told CNN Monday. "And that statement is something like, 'No, the future we imagine is one of personalized manufacture and access to objects. It doesn't matter what the decision is on the Hill ... in this future, people will be able to make guns for themselves.'  "That was already true, but now it's been demonstrated in yet another technology."  Despite that worldview, Defense Distributed applied for, and in March received, a federal firearm license which makes it a legal gun manufacturer.  Wilson acknowledged in a recent interview with Forbes that his creation could be used by criminals, but suggested that demonstrating the freedom to create them is more important than trying to stop that from happening.  "I recognize that this tool might be used to harm people. That's what it is: It's a gun," he said. "But I don't think that's a reason to not put it out there. I think that liberty in the end is a better interest."  Defense Distributed is based near Austin, Texas. Wilson has emerged as the face of the group, although many of its members, including the owners of the 3-D printer the group uses, have chosen to remain anonymous.  The group's future plans include expanding the range of ammunition a 3-D printed gun can fire and making the guns printable with less expensive printers, such as the $2,800 Replicator 2 by Makerbot.
(Financial Times) -- The first shareholder question to Warren Buffett on Saturday morning was gentle, but with a mild preamble of complaint.  The doors to the Omaha stadium had opened half an hour early at 6.30am, and he was asked if this could not be a permanent adjustment to the timeworn schedule of the Berkshire Hathaway annual meeting.  Thousands of investors had queued in the Nebraskan drizzle to claim seats close to Mr Buffett and Charlie Munger, his vice-chairman, and when the octogenarians arrived onstage two hours later, more than 20,000 had packed in to hear their answers.  A year ago, discontent rumbled at the level of the conglomerate's share price, but on Friday it had reached a record $160,294 per A share.  With a $268bn market capitalisation, Mr Buffett reported, to applause, that Berkshire was the world's fifth-largest company.  The investor has spent half a century accumulating more than 70 companies in sectors ranging from candy bars and corporate jets to insurance and cargo trains, and as his company has grown, so have the crowds of pilgrims drawn to Omaha.  Susie Buffett, daughter of Warren, said that an old school friend was attending for the first time.  "She remembers my dad in his bathrobe making Jiffy pop in the kitchen, and I keep telling her that you have got to come, you are not going to believe how weird this is."  Many come because there may not be many more and, in a world of online real time updates, it is the rare event where recording and broadcasting are simply not allowed.  The message is unchanging: buy stocks at the right price, be optimistic, trust Warren. But shareholders said that hearing it each year was a mental reset, a reminder of a particular approach to investing that acolytes try to follow.  If there was a downbeat message, it was a familiar one that Berkshire's size meant future growth must be slower, "because of course our past returns were almost unbelievable", said Mr Munger.  The two men also warned that bond-buying by the Federal Reserve would have unpredictable consequences.  Mr Buffett said: "It's been a very smart policy, but the unwind of it has got to be more difficult than buying."  He said that when inflation did pick up for the first time, "it's likely to be the shot heard round the world", but he could not predict when it would happen and said it "doesn't mean the world will end".  On his own company, Mr Buffett had for the first time invited along a bear on the stock to provide bite.  Doug Kass of the hedge fund Seabreeze Partners, who has taken a short position on Berkshire, gamely probed Mr Buffett about what happens after his death, when his son will take over as chairman: "Other than accident of birth, how is he qualified?"  Yet Mr Kass -- describing himself as "Daniel in the lion's den" in front of Mr Buffett's thousands of friends -- served more as straight man setting up lines for the crowd favourites. The billionaire shot back that Mr Kass was welcome to bring his own friends along next time.  The Oracle could not be swayed from the script. His son would be non-executive chairman to safeguard the company's culture, he said, in case the successor turned out be the wrong choice.  Mr Buffett said he and his board knew who that person would be, even if they would not say, and change after he had gone would be minimal: perhaps the Omaha head office might hire a 24th employee.  The meeting slipped into an easy rhythm, alternating between the merits of individual Berkshire business, thoughts on fads such as online currency -- "of our $49bn [of cash] we haven't moved any to Bitcoin", said Mr Buffett -- and requests for advice.  The insurance business was a favourite, particularly Geico, its consumer brand.  But Mr Buffett also revealed that four top insurance executives he recently poached from AIG to build a commercial insurance business had approached Berkshire about the move.  "It could be a business that reaches into the billions," Mr Buffett said. "We've got the right people. We've got capital like no one else."  Asked to name his 10 favourite books, Mr Buffett returned to the one that most influenced him: Benjamin Graham's Security Analysis, the value investors' Bible.  After more than four hours of such answers, most investors seemed to relish hearing the thoughts of the men in person.  Patrick Wolff, of Grandmaster Capital, said: "There really is nothing else like this on the planet, and who knows how long it will keep going."
The measures, detailed in a statement issued by the United Nations' International Labour Organization, include the recruitment of 200 additional building inspectors within six months, a review of current garment producers and a promise to fix all problematic factories.  The agreement between the U.N. organization and Bangladesh officials comes amid growing international concern about working conditions in Bangladesh.  It calls for a legislative reform package that will be submitted when the country's parliament convenes in June. The legislation would ensure the right of workers to engage in collective bargaining and to secure union representation.  Yet implementation remains a question. Bangladesh is politically volatile, and analysts say substantial work is needed to change a culture of lax regulation and cozy relations between factory owners and the government.  Almost two weeks have now passed since a garment factory collapsed outside the capital city of Dhaka, sparking protests on the streets of Bangladesh and at the doors of western retailers that sell merchandise produced in the country.  A total of 657 bodies had been pulled from the collapsed building as of Monday. An unknown number of workers remain buried under the rubble, and family members of the missing remain camped near the building site.  The tragedy follows two factory fires in November that killed more than 100 workers.  Bangladesh's economy is almost wholly dependent on the garment industry, with around 4,500 factories in operation.  Companies have been drawn to the country as they seek to push production prices lower and boost profits while meeting global demand for cheap clothes. But cutting costs often goes hand-in-hand with low wages and unsafe working conditions.  The average worker in the garment industry in Bangladesh makes between 10 and 30 cents an hour, and many of the factories do not have windows, fire escapes or emergency exists, according to labor rights activists. At the same time, supporters say the garment industry has driven economic growth and provided acceptable jobs for women living in a conservative society.  Last week, the EU warned that Bangladesh must make its factories safer or risk the loss of privileged access to the country's biggest market. EU Trade Commissioner Karel De Gucht increased pressure over the weekend, describing labor conditions in the country as "modern slavery."  "We see now that in practice these workers are -- we can't say underpaid -- almost not paid, and above all, they have to work in completely unacceptable health and safety conditions," De Gucht said during an interview with Belgian media.  Bangladesh currently enjoys duty and quota-free access to EU markets through a program called the Generalized System of Preferences, which allows 48 of the poorest nations unlimited exports of anything but arms.  "The Bangladeshi government has to change things. And I've been very clear -- they need to get down to it in a clear and prompt time frame," De Gucht said. "Otherwise, I'm prepared to start an investigation."  It's the first time the EU has threatened to take action against Bangladesh within the context of the GSP trade program. As a last resort, the EU could suspend Bangladesh's privileged access to its markets, a measure taken in the past against Myanmar and Sri Lanka over human rights issues.  Some retailers appear to be reevaluating their use of labor in the country.  The Walt Disney Company ( Fortune 500) stopped production in Bangladesh of branded merchandise in March in order to bolster safety standards in its supply chain.  Disney also plans to halt production in four other countries -- Ecuador, Venezuela, Belarus and Pakistan -- by April 2014.  "What's happening in Bangladesh, for me, is completely unacceptable in human terms," De Gucht said. "If the result is that the price of t-shirts and jeans goes up a bit, well, that'll be what happens."
(CNN) -- Turkey and Japan have agreed to a $22 billion deal to build a nuclear power plant in Turkey, the semi-official Turkish news agency Anadolu reported.  The deal, signed Friday, represents a step toward recovery for Japan's nuclear industry, left reeling by the devastating earthquake and tsunami that triggered a disaster at the Fukushima Daiichi plant in 2011.  Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan and Japan's Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, speaking at a joint news conference, said the deal would place relations between the two nations on a different level.  Japanese and French companies lead the consortium which will deliver the contract signed by the two governments.  The third-generation ATMEA1 reactor will be built in Turkey's northern Sinop province, which borders the Black Sea, said GDF SUEZ, part of the consortium.  Erdogan said lessons had been learned from the Fukushima disaster, the worst nuclear accident in a generation.  "After the Fukushima incident, people said negative things about Japanese technology," Erdogan said, quoted by Anadolu.  But, he said, in response to that criticism he drew a parallel with what happens after an air crash. "We should consider there is a risk of accident, but we need that technology. With an advanced technology we will take better steps."  Turkey, like Japan, is in an active earthquake zone.  The two prime ministers said they hoped it would take less than a decade to complete the project.  The two countries have also agreed to found a Turkish-Japanese Technical University in Turkey, Anadolu reported, with plans to follow up with a Japan-based counterpart in the future.  "A step like this between Turkey and Japan is really important," said Erdogan.  The tsunami that hit Fukushima Daiichi after Japan's historic earthquake knocked out power and coolant systems at the plant, resulting in meltdowns in three reactors.  The result was the most serious nuclear accident since Chernobyl, as the crippled reactors spewed enormous amounts of radioactive particles into the environment.  CNN's Bharati Naik and Saad Abedine contributed to this report.
(CNN) -- FIFA's anti-racism Task Force proposed the attendance of officials to specifically "identify potential acts of discrimination" at matches when the newly-created body first met on Monday.  Chaired by FIFA vice president Jeffrey Webb, who presides over the continental CONCACAF body, the Task Force also suggested the possibility of points deductions and/or relegation for "reoffenders or for serious incidents".  The Task Force will present a draft resolution at the FIFA Congress in Mauritius at the end of the month whereupon member associations will vote on the measures.  "We have a special responsibility in the way we can impact football and society," said Webb during his opening remarks in Zurich.  "One of the opportunities this task force has is its vast reach throughout FIFA's 209 member associations, where we can implement the resolutions in every region and every country where football is played, bringing universality to the mechanisms that combat racism and discrimination."  The creation of the Task Force was announced in March after a series of racial incidents affecting the sport.  In England, both Luiz Suarez and John Terry received bans for racial abuse in separate incidents that took place in 2011 but the story that made headlines around the world came when Milan's Kevin-Prince Boateng led his team off in a friendly in protest at racism from supporters this January.  Boateng was swiftly invited by Blatter to FIFA headquarters and was one of the first names added to the makeup of the Task Force, but the Ghanaian did not attend Monday's meeting due to playing commitments.  "K-P Boateng and Jozy Altidore didn't make today's FIFA meet," tweeted Task Force member Osasu Obayiuwana, a football journalist and lawyer. "I hope they attend the next session. Views of active players are crucial."  In their absence, the Task Force suggested that officials attend games to identify discriminatory acts "with the aim of easing the pressure on referees and facilitating the availability of evidence, which is not always easy to obtain".  The second proposal is likely to be of more interest to fans, especially those who have long argued that points deductions are a more efficient punishment for clubs and national teams than paltry fines.  The Task Force suggested the application of sanctions in two stages, with the threat of "a warning, a fine or the playing of a match behind closed doors" for "a first or minor offence".  For more serious incidents and those who reoffended, the Task Force spoke of "points deductions, expulsion from a competition, or relegation".  The third proposal from the new body was for the "need to implement the existing sanctions in a harmonized way across all confederations, member associations and leagues".  FIFA president Sepp Blatter, who courted controversy in 2011 when telling CNN that racism could be settled by a handshake after the match, announced his satisfaction with the inaugural meeting.  "Very happy with first Task Force Against Racism & Discrimination meeting," he tweeted, before later adding "We want strong & consistent sanctions at all levels of football for any discriminatory act."  A second Task Force meeting is planned for later in the year to discuss how to educate those in football in a manner which reduces discriminatory acts in the game.
(CNN) -- Phil Mickelson's hopes of a first victory since January were derailed by his struggles at "the Green Mile" on Sunday, as rookie Derek Ernst earned his maiden PGA Tour title in a playoff at the Wells Fargo Championship.  While four-time major winner Mickelson dropped shots at two of his final three holes, Ernst birdied his last to force a playoff with Englishman David Lynn -- which he won at the first hole.  It earned him the $1.17 million first prize and an invite to next week's $9.5 million Players Championship -- the golf season's unofficial "fifth major."  Ernst, who turns 23 on May 16, had made the cut in just two of his previous seven tournaments of his first season on the circuit, with a best finish of 47th in New Orleans last weekend.  The California native graduated from University of Nevada-Las Vegas last year with a degree in hotel management before turning pro.  "This feeling is unbelievable right now," he told reporters. "Just at the beginning of the week not even knowing I was going to be in the field. I was fourth alternate last time I heard, and then a couple people dropped out so I got in."  Mickelson has won 41 times on the tour, and seemed set for his second victory this season despite dropping three shots at 15 and 16 in Saturday's third round.  The 42-year-old birdied 14 to be in contention but then again lost a shot at 16 to be in a three-way tie for the lead as the crowd sheltered under umbrellas in the wet conditions in South Carolina.  He then bogeyed 17 -- where he is now 14 over par in the 40 times he has played that hole -- and missed his birdie putt at 18 to card a one-over-par 73.  The last three holes at the Quail Hollow club are known as "the Green Mile" -- a stretch which is rated as one of the top-five hardest finishing runs on the PGA Tour in the past decade.  Mickelson racked up his seventh top-10 finish in 10 appearances at Wells Fargo, ending up one shot ahead of England's former world No. 1 Lee Westwood and Sweden's Robert Karlsson, who tied for fourth.  Lynn, 39, had also been seeking his first PGA Tour win, having finished in a tie for fourth at the Honda Classic in March -- and runner-up at last season's closing major, the PGA Championship.  He and Ernst had been three shots behind Mickelson going into the fourth round.  World No. 2 Rory McIlroy, who won his first PGA Tour title at Quail Hollow in 2010, finished tied for 10th after carding a second successive 73.  The Northern Irishman bogeyed his first and last holes, and also picked up a double at the par-four 12th.  Meanwhile, Brett Rumford completed his second successive victory on the European Tour's Asian swing with a four-shot victory at the China Open on Sunday.  The 35-year-old Australian followed up his playoff win from last weekend's Ballantine's Championship in South Korea as he carded five birdies in the first 10 holes of his final round.  It put him top of the Race to Dubai standings, having been 138th two weeks ago.  "It's quite surreal -- it's the first time I've actually played the week after a win so I'm more than pleased. It's hard to get my head around it at the moment," Rumford said.  Finland's Mikko Ilonen was second, having started the fourth round one shot behind Rumford.  Defending champion Branden Grace of South Africa tied for 33rd in a group including 16-year-old Dou Zecheng -- who was the best finisher of the group of young Chinese talent in the field.
An Air Force officer was arrested for sexual assault. The remarkable thing is the accused man was the chief of the Air Force sexual assault prevention unit.  The mug shot of Lt. Col. Jeff Krusinski shows signs of struggle on his face. The police report alleges that a drunken Krusinski "approached a female victim in a parking lot and grabbed her breasts and buttocks." The victim fought the suspect off as he attempted to touch her again and alerted police.  News of the incident in the Virginia suburbs of Washington broke the day before the Pentagon is scheduled to release new figures showing a continuing rise in sexual assaults in the military: A six-percent increase from 3,192 to 3,374 reports of sexual assault in fiscal year 2012 compared to the previous year.  Military sexual assault victims testify before Congress Lackland sex scandal prompts U.S. Air Force to discipline former commanders Pentagon battling military rape "epidemic"  Estimates of the actual numbers of what is a notoriously underreported crime go much higher. According to the Pentagon figures, an estimated 26,000 servicewomen experienced unwanted sexual contact, up from 19,300 two year ago -- a number the pentagon says is "unacceptable."  Krusinski has been removed from his job, but that will not change the reality that the Pentagon's own figures show sexual assaults are on the rise in the military.
(CNN) -- Right now, it's nothing more than an empty plot of land, covered by just a few shrubs and the odd Neem tree. But within a few years, these grass plains just outside Accra, Ghana, could be transformed into a fertile breeding ground for world-class innovation.  Earlier this month, Ghanaian president John Mahama launched Hope City, a $10 billion high-tech hub aiming to foster technological growth and attract major players in the global ICT industry to the West African country.  The ambitious project is the brainchild of Ghanaian businessman Roland Agambire, head of local technology group RLG Communications. Smart and futuristic, the hub's sustainable facilities will include an assembly plant for various tech products, business offices, an IT university and a hospital, as well as housing and recreation spaces, including restaurants, theaters and sports centers.  "What is lacking in the African continent is a place where you can have well-designed products, backed with concrete research and proper hardware and software developers to be able to create infrastructure for the telecoms industry," says Agambire, 39, whose company has acquired the land where the technopolis will be built.  "So the inspiration behind Hope City is to have an iconic ICT park where ICT players from all over the world can converge to design, fabricate and export software and everything arising from this country," he adds.  Read this: Why tech innovators are Africa's future  Construction is expected to begin by June 2013 and when completed -- within three years, if everything goes as planned -- the technology park could house 25,000 residents and create jobs for 50,000 people.  Agambire, one of Ghana's top businessmen, says his company is financing 30% of the project, while the remainder will be funded by a wide array of investors and through a stock-buying scheme.  The entrepreneur says the IT hub has already attracted several partners, including Microsoft, with Microsoft corporate vice president Ali Faramawy among the guests at the Hope City launch event.  Agambire adds that the Hope City project also has the support of the Ghanaian government, as it aims to create create thousands of jobs and help turn technology into one of the country's main economic drivers.  "What we want to do is to create the environment and the human resource base for the technology industry to be able to use that [environment] and tap that opportunity," he says. "That's what has happened in China, that's what has happened in other places of the world."  Hope City will be developed in an area of about 1.5 million square meters, located some 30 minutes west of Accra's city center.  Designed by Italian firm Architect OBR, the technopolis will be made up of six towers of different dimensions, including a 75-story, 270 meter-high building that is expected to be the highest in Africa. A system of bridges at different heights will link the towers together, creating a circular connection between the buildings' functions and public amenities.  OBR co-founder Paolo Brescia says the project's goal is to create a living place of discovery and exploration that reflects the tradition and culture of local people in a contemporary urban setting.  To achieve this, the architects designed Hope City with Ghana's traditional compound houses in mind. Originally made of mud brick walls and thatched roofs, compound structures have been a prevalent form of housing in the country for centuries, built to promote communal life and mutual assistance.  "We wanted to recreate, at a different scale, the same feeling of the compound house in a way that it could work as a compound cluster," explains Brescia.  "This place is designed to keep people together," he adds. "We developed this idea, not as a campus, where you have buildings which are dedicated to single functions, but as a city which is developed in a vertical way so that everything could be interconnected."  The launch of Hope City comes just a few months after Kenya broke ground on its own flagship tech mega project; located some 60 kilometers southeast of the capital Nairobi, Konza Techno City is being touted as "Africa's Silicon Savannah," a major IT hub that aims to create some 100,000 jobs by 2030.  Kenya has already experienced a major IT boom in recent years, spurred in part by a surge in the number of innovation centers, such as Nairobi-based iHub, which enable young coders and aspiring entrepreneurs to collaborate, network and develop their trailblazing ideas.  Read this: How 'Afropreneurs' will shape Africa's future  Similar spaces have also mushroomed across Africa in recent years, from Egypt and Nigeria to Tanzania and Madagascar.  In Ghana, one such center is Accra-based Mobile Web Ghana, a vibrant tech space with more than 300 members. Florence Toffa, director of Mobile Web Ghana, welcomes the launch of Hope City.  "This city hopefully will bring the tech companies together and spark a new ICT revolution in Ghana," she says, adding that the project could equip local techies with the necessary skills to develop apps that would solve community problems, as well as provide a platform for tech companies to find new talent and opportunities to invest in.  For Agambire, this is a project that will position Ghana at the forefront of African technology.  "Africa is hungry for development," he says. "Want to make sure that in three years down the line, Hope City will be a reality and will be one of the biggest dreams that Africa has ever seen."
JPMorgan Chase's ( Fortune 500) larger-than-life CEO appeared to survive the London Whale -- the bank's big bet on derivatives that resulted in nearly $6 billion in losses -- with his power undiminished.  But one year later, he is under fire from a wide swath of shareholders who are pushing the board to strip him of his role of chairman.  On top of that, one of the most influential shareholder advisory firms, ISS Proxy Advisory Services, also recommended that shareholders vote against three of the bank's long-serving board members. The three directors, Honeywell's ( Fortune 500) CEO David Cote, private investment adviser Henry Crown, and the American Museum of National History's CEO Ellen Futtter, all served on the bank's risk oversight committee, and were most responsible for overseeing the trading operations that led to the London Whale losses.  If ISS ultimately holds sway, Jamie Dimon could be faced with a new, less agreeable board.  ISS also criticized JPMorgan's entire board for a lack of independence. In the face of the massive London Whale trading losses, "the board appears to have been largely reactive, making changes only when it was clear that it could no longer maintain the status quo," ISS said.  David Larcker, a professor of corporate governance at Stanford Graduate School of Business, said ISS typically succeeds at influencing the votes of between 25% to 30% of shareholders.  Last year, 40% of the company's shareholders voted to replace Dimon with an independent chairman. But shareholders were more willing to keep the same board in place. Of JPMorgan's 11 directors, 10 received more than 95% of a vote to keep them. Ellen Futter received the least support, and she was still backed by 86% of shareholders.  Shareholder votes don't necessarily dictate a board's actions. Corporate boards are only meant to use these votes to inform their decisions. Even if a majority of shareholders ask for an independent chairman, the board doesn't have to comply.  That said, a vote against the status quo can become a public relations nightmare for the bank.  "Once you start getting this push from outside shareholders, it becomes a long, time consuming thing for the board and the bank," said Stanford's Larcker.  ISS isn't the only shareholder who has been actively pushing for Dimon to exit his chairmanship.  The nation's largest public pension system Calpers has pushed for an independent chairman at the bank for several years. But this year, Joe Dear, Calper's chief investment officer, said pension funds holding JPMorgan shares have been more proactive in coordinating their votes.  Related: What could cause the next financial crisis  To be fair, Dimon is still revered for his work leading the bank through the financial crisis and even past the London Whale debacle. But some of the largest shareholders that praise his work also think the bank would fare better if his power was diminished.  "Jamie Dimon is one of the most talented CEOs in the world," said Dear. "With [his] outsize personality, it's important to split the jobs of chairman and CEO. It's a bedrock principal of corporate governance."  The board has said it will back Dimon as both its CEO and chairman.In the runup to the May 21 meeting, the bank is actively talking to shareholders to help convince them that Dimon is needed in both roles and why their board members should be re-elected.  In an SEC filing, the company's board said Dimon as CEO and chairman is "the most effective leadership model for the Firm."  Still, some shareholders, such as revered Berkshire Hathaway chief Warren Buffett, still think Dimon is the right man for both jobs.  At his annual shareholder meeting in Omaha, Neb., Buffett told Bloomberg Television: "I couldn't think of a better chairman."
The company said that online pharmacies have proliferated in recent years to meet consumer demand for all manner of medication, but that most of these sites are not legitimate.  Viagra is Pfizer's most counterfeited product. A 2011 study conducted by the company found that 80% of the top 22 sites that came up most often in search results for the phrase "buy Viagra" were selling counterfeit pills. The counterfeit pills have only a fraction of the active ingredients advertised.  The new site, Viagra.com, will direct consumers to a site run by CVS ( Fortune 500) pharmacy. Customers must have a prescription to order from the site, and insurance coverage can be used to lower the price of the pills.  Pfizer said the cost of Viagra depends on the strength of the drug and the quantity ordered, and will be set by CVS. The wholesale cost for the 100 mg tablets is $22 a pill. The site is offering customers three free pills with their first order, and 30% off their second order.  This is the first time a major drugmaker is moving into online sales rather than simply selling through drug wholesalers and pharmacies. Pfizer said it will consider expanding online sales to other products in the future.  "We're going to learn from this and see where we go from there," said spokeswoman Jennifer Kokell.  Pfizer reported $2.05 billion in Viagra sales in 2012, according to the company's financial filings. But that represents only 3.5% of the company's total revenue and makes Viagra only it's sixth best selling drug. Its patent protections for use of the drug to treat erectile dysfunction runs through 2020.  Shares of Pfizer ( Fortune 500) were lower in early trading Monday.
(CNN) -- Singer Lauryn Hill's failure to pay federal income taxes for three years has earned her a three-month prison sentence.  Hill pleaded guilty last year to three counts of failing to file tax returns on more than $1.8 million between 2005 and 2007.  The Grammy-winning artist appeared Monday before U.S. Magistrate Judge Madeline Cox Arleo in federal court in Newark, New Jersey, for sentencing.  Hill must also pay penalties and taxes still owed, a $60,000 fine, serve a year on probation and possibly three months of home confinement.  She must report to prison on July 8, unless her lawyer files an appeal of the sentence.  The income in question was mostly from music and film royalties paid to companies she owned between 2005 and 2008, according to the U.S. attorney's office.  "Although Hill pleaded guilty to charges specifically related to those tax years, her sentence also takes into account additional income and tax losses for 2008 and 2009 -- when she also failed to file federal returns -- along with her outstanding tax liability to the state of New Jersey, for a total income of approximately $2.3 million and total tax loss of approximately $1,006,517," the prosecutor said.  Hill's lawyer, Nathan Hochman, told CNN before the sentencing that, "Ms. Hill has not only now fully paid prior to sentencing her taxes which are part of her criminal restitution, but she has additionally fully paid her federal and state personal taxes for the entire period under examination through 2009."  Hill revealed in a message posted to her Tumblr account last month that she's been working on new music.  "It has been reported that I signed a new record deal, and that I did this to pay taxes. Yes, I have recently entered into an agreement with Sony Worldwide Entertainment, to launch a new label, on which my new music will be released," Hill wrote. "And yes, I am working on new music."  Her fans have been waiting for new music from here since her 1998 solo album, "The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill."
The SEC says the misleading statements came in the city's 2009 budget report, its annual and mid-year financial statements and a "State of the City" address. The case marks the first time the SEC has charged a municipality with misleading investors in statements made outside of securities documents.  Harrisburg has been mired in financial difficulties for years. The situation dates back to over a decade ago, when the city decided to upgrade a trash incinerator. Harrisburg was counting on revenue from the project to cover the cost of financing it, but instead, it left the city with over $300 million in debt.  "In an information vacuum caused by Harrisburg's failure to provide accurate information about its deteriorating financial condition, municipal investors had to rely on other public statements misrepresenting city finances," the SEC's George Canellos said in a statement.  Harrisburg agreed to settle the charges without admitting or denying wrongdoing, as is common in SEC cases. The agency's order in the case amounts to a warning -- it requires the city to comply with securities laws going forward, but does not include a monetary penalty.  Harrisburg Mayor Linda Thompson said in a statement that her administration cooperated fully with the SEC's investigation, and that the city "has completely revamped its policies and procedures for financial disclosures."  "I and all of the members of my administration are happy to have this matter concluded so that we can continue moving forward with the City's fiscal recovery," Thompson said.  Harrisburg attempted to file for bankruptcy in 2011, but a federal judge later ruled that it was barred from doing so under state law. Today, the city of roughly 50,000 is under state receivership and remains saddled with the incinerator debt.  The SEC says Harrisburg's 2009 budget documents did not include funds needed for debt repayment, and misstated the city's credit rating as Aaa when it had in fact been downgraded. The city's mid-year fiscal report from 2009 also failed to reference debt repayments, which accounted for 7% of Harrisburg's general fund expenditures, the SEC said.  The "State of the City" address posted on Harrisburg's website in 2009 referenced the incinerator situation only as an "additional challenge" that "can be resolved," failing to disclose many millions of dollars in debt for which the city was on the hook, according to the SEC order. Meanwhile, the city was years late in submitting its financial documents from 2008, 2009 and 2010 to an official database for municipal issuers, the agency said.
How did pregnancy change you? Send your advice for Kate.  (CNN) -- "A nation's joy, a husband's nerves," exclaimed Britain's Daily Mail newspaper, as it contrasted Prince William's anxious wait at his pregnant wife's bedside with the excitement generated by news of her impending motherhood.  The revelation that Catherine, the Duchess of Cambridge, was pregnant came after she was admitted to hospital in London on Monday afternoon suffering acute morning sickness.  The newspaper said the royal couple had hoped to keep their baby news under wraps until Christmas Day, when she had passed the 12-week mark in her pregnancy.  "Kate expectations," declared popular British tabloid, The Sun, with an article detailing the treatment that Catherine, 30, was receiving for hyperemesis gravidarum, a condition that causes more severe nausea and vomiting than typical morning sickness.  The newspaper said even senior royals, including Queen Elizabeth II, were taken by surprise as the couple had yet to break the news to family.  The Sun's graphics department produced composite images of what they speculated the royal baby would look like as a baby of either gender, while the Mail ran mock-ups created by a U.S. forensic artist imagining how the child might look as a young boy or girl.  The Times also led with news of Catherine's hospital dash, splashing a picture across its front page of a concerned William leaving London's King Edward VII hospital last night. The paper also joined the rush of feverish debate about the future royal's sex, potential name and position in the royal line of succession.  Read: Who can inherit the British throne?  Boy or girl, the new baby will be third in line to the throne, behind William and his father, Prince Charles, who will become a grandfather for the first time. The Times explained that an imminent change to the law means that if Catherine has a girl, the child will make history by being the first British princess not to suffer discrimination because of her sex.  UK tabloid the Daily Express, in a "royal souvenir special" edition, ran a piece speculating that it was more likely that Catherine was carrying a girl, or twins, citing research that linked those outcomes to morning sickness.  Bookmakers also look set for a royal bonanza, with Victoria, Frances and Mary among the frontrunners for the most likely girl's name, though the odds that William's first-born child will be named after his late mother, Diana, Princess of Wales, have been judged at between 9-1 and 12-1, The Times said.  However, Elizabeth is the hot favorite at 8-1, according to leading British bookmaker Ladbrokes. Brooklyn and Chardonnay were listed as long shots by bookmakers.  Ladbrokes has Charles and John at 10-1 when it comes to boy's names, but Harry, the name of the baby's uncle, is a distinct outsider at 33-1.  Bookmakers are also taking bets on the baby's hair color, with one offering brown at 6-4 and red at 8-1, and another offering odds on the likelihood of an albino royal baby.  Bookmakers were also taking bets on the child's birth weight, and the identity of the godparents.  As expected, the name game is a white-hot pastime on social media, with #royalbabynames and #royalbaby among the biggest trending hashtags on Twitter. Among the more amusing suggestions were Cheryl and Jedward, reflecting Britain's recent obsession with television talent shows.  Twitter was also a popular destination for celebrities and public figures alike to voice their happiness at the news. British Prime Minister David Cameron was swift to offer his congratulations.  Former Wimbledon tennis champ Boris Becker tweeted a picture of himself giving two thumbs up with a message of congratulations.  The news prompted responses from U.S. celebrities as well, with reality TV star Kim Kardashian tweeting her delight at the reports.  News of the royal baby also grabbed column inches internationally.  "Royal baby a bonus for special editions," declared The Australian, as it predicted that Australian women's magazines would now go into coverage hyperdrive with a series of royal specials.  "Royal Baby a 'Delight,' Especially to Britain's Tabloids," ran the headline in The New York Times. The paper's Sarah Lyall observed that "speculation began virtually the moment Kate Middleton said 'I will' to Prince William in April 2011, leaving an industry of tabloid newspapers and gossip magazines with a big black hole where their wedding coverage used to be."  Lyall said those who had previously -- and incorrectly -- guessed something was afoot because Catherine was drinking water instead of wine at some official dinner could now finally claim to be right.
(CNN) -- Jose Mourinho might be feeling the pressure at Real Madrid, but the world's most famous soccer coach has taken time out to help a man from a tiny island nation who fully understands the importance of high-intensity decision-making.  In one life, Lucio Antunes is an air traffic controller. In another, he is coach of the Cape Verde national football team, which this weekend will play at the Africa Cup of Nations for the first time.  "Mourinho is very friendly with the President of Cape Verde so when we qualified, the President spoke to him -- and Mourinho then invited me to Real Madrid for one week," Antunes told CNN's Human to Hero series.  Mourinho is known as "the Special One," a winner of major trophies at top clubs such as Real, Inter Milan, Chelsea and Porto in his native Portugal. He is one of the most sought-after coaches in world football despite his team's difficulties in Spain this season.  Read: What can we expect from the 2013 Africa Cup of Nations?  Antunes is being hailed as Cape Verde's very own tactical magician, having in October guided the "Blue Sharks" through the final stages of the African qualification process for the first time since the country earned independence from Portugal in 1975.  "There is only one 'Special One,' " laughs Antunes. "He is fantastic, very intelligent and has a big heart -- it was a pleasure to meet him.  "I attended five training sessions and two matches, talked tactics with both Mourinho and some of the players, but the main thing I learned was his clarity in terms of his communication with his squad and technical staff."  The 46-year-old expects to return to the control tower at the international airport on the island of Sal after his stint as national coach ends, having taken time off his day job.  He had to employ all his skills to take the islanders through a qualifying route that climaxed with a two-leg clash against Cameroon's Indomitable Lions -- four-time winners of the African trophy, and led by one of the world's leading players, Samuel Eto'o.  "In air traffic control, we have to think very fast and take decisions very quickly -- there is no time to wait," Antune says.  "There is a lot of pressure in air traffic control because there are a lot of planes. But the air traffic controller skills help me with coaching because I am also working with a lot of pressure in football as well."  He was appointed national team boss in July 2010, having worked as assistant coach for the previous year. He also led the nation's under-21 team to success at the 2009 Lusophony Games for Portuguese-speaking countries.  "It is far easier to be a football coach than an air traffic controller because you have enormous responsibility when there are so many planes flying around," Antune says.  A fine all-round sportsman in his youth, he played for leading local football side Sporting Clube da Praia, competing in a league spread over nine of the 10 islands -- with a population of just half a million -- that make up Cape Verde's archipelago.  But in 1990, a year when the islands' unemployment rate hit a high of 20%, Antunes -- who has also represented his country at basketball and table tennis -- leapt at the chance to train as an air traffic controller.  Continuing his work while also playing football, Antunes went on to play for the national team, as did his father and all four his of brothers -- one of whom enjoyed a successful professional career in Portugal.  One of the biggest challenges -- and ironies -- of his dual career is that the football federation's limited coffers mean the air traffic controller has been unable to fly to Europe to watch those expatriate players who have come on board for Cape Verde's continental mission.  Over the years, the emigration from the islands has been so great that the number of Cape Verdeans and their descendants living overseas now exceeds the population of those at home, so Antunes is forced to use the very simplest of methods to follow his footballers' form.  "We have no money to fly to Europe -- as it's very expensive -- so this makes my job very hard," he says.  "So if players are playing for their European team, then we believe that they are good -- and then they come to the national team. Otherwise, we just watch on TV or on DVDs that we have been sent."  Read: Better than Bolt? fastest men on ice  After achieving independence as a nation, Cape Verde had to wait 17 years before winning a competitive match.  Team captain Fernando Maria Neves, known as Nando, sometimes has to pinch himself to realize the Sharks will be performing on Africa's biggest stage.  The 34-year-old defender, who won his first cap back in 2002, has played club football in Tunisia, Qatar, Czech Republic and France, but this is a career highlight.  "To qualify my team is something special," Nando told CNN.  "It's a gift, first of all to even get to the Africa Cup of Nations, but then to open the tournament, I don't think there is something better than this."  Cape Verde will take on host nation South Africa in Saturday's first match in Johannesburg, and will also play Angola and 1976 champions Morocco in their Group A matches.  Despite the team's lack of resources in the face of such experienced opposition, Nando says his team will be inspired by a sheer love of the game.  "Football in the Cape Verde is the same as religion. Everybody likes football in Cape Verde. Here it's first you must go to church, after that you must play football."  And Antunes is fully aware of his team's responsibility to meet the aspirations of the Cape Verde fans.  "We recognize the effort the country has made to support us, so we will do our best to repay our country," he said.  Cape Verde's touchdown at the tournament should certainly be eased by having Antunes at their helm, no matter what turbulence the debutants may encounter on their maiden flight into the unknown.
Editor's note: Ruben Navarrette is a CNN contributor and a nationally syndicated columnist. Follow him on Twitter: @rubennavarrette.  San Diego (CNN) -- Did Senate Republicans have too much bubbly on New Year's Eve and pass a bill to avert the fiscal cliff that some in the GOP insist includes too much in new taxes without cutting spending? Are House Republicans so stubborn in their pursuit of spending cuts that they're ready to go to war with members of their own party?  In trying to avoid the fiscal cliff, House and Senate Republicans put the Grand Ole Party -- and the country -- on the brink of a political one.  It's never good for party unity when a House lawmaker jokes that his Senate colleagues passed a late-night measure because of "partying and revelry and drinking" in the wee hours. Yet, that's what California representative and House Oversight Committee Chairman Darrell Issa said in an interview on CNN's "The Situation Room." When Wolf Blitzer asked Issa if he was suggesting that Senate Republicans were drunk when they voted, Issa backtracked and said: "Of course not. I was just having a little fun with you, Wolf."  That's hilarious. This guy must be the life of the party. But the rest of us still have to wonder whether, after the raucous fiscal cliff negotiations, his party has any life left in it.  The House adjourned on Monday without voting on a bill to avoid the automatic tax hikes and deep spending cuts set to take place that midnight. The Senate burned the midnight oil and passed -- by a vote of 89 to 8 -- an emergency bill with more than $600 billion in new revenue over 10 years. The legislation also allowed the Bush-era tax cuts to expire for families making more than $450,000 annually.  On New Year's Day, House Republicans struck back and rejected the Senate bill as insufficient in its spending cuts. Only 85 Republicans voted in favor, while 151 voted against. With plenty of Democratic support, the measure passed. But it was over the objections of most House Republicans, who will surely fight for more cuts in spending during the fast-approaching debt ceiling negotiations.  The bigger drama is still playing out. We're seeing a civil war between Republicans, although at this point you really can't call it "civil."  This is not a simple difference of opinion that can be papered over by inserting a few paragraphs into a bill. This is about different visions for what Republicans think their role should be when they're out of power.  Speaking of power, House Speaker John Boehner appears to be fresh out. After failing to get enough support from those in his own party for an alternative plan in the House, Boehner wound up going "all in" on passing a bill. He must have thought that his speakership depended on not coming up empty-handed.  Politics: Are the days of Congress 'going big' over? But Boehner might have lost a good deal of the support and confidence of his Republican colleagues. The formal vote on whether to keep him in the speaker's chair is set for Thursday. House Majority Leader Eric Cantor just might be biding his time in the wings, after he split from Boehner and voted no on the Senate bill.  Boehner let the pressure get to him.  Just ask Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, who is never at a loss for words, and usually the wrong ones. Reid accused of Boehner of running the House of Representatives like a "dictatorship." So when Boehner happened to bump into Reid, a few days before the fiscal cliff deadline, in a hallway of the White House, witnesses say the speaker told the Democratic majority leader to "go f--- yourself." Twice.  It also doesn't help build support or confidence in the speaker that he has proved to be no match for the chess skills of President Barack Obama, who always seems to have a pretty good idea of the opposition's next move. So, when Obama staged a press event on New Year's Eve to press for higher taxes on the wealthy as the House was deliberating, he had to know that the stunt would scuttle the process. That would have sent us over the cliff and ensure that Republicans got the blame. Checkmate.  The trouble is, that's not leadership. It's gamesmanship. On this issue, as with many others, Obama the Master Politician confuses the two.  To avoid the fiscal cliff, Senate Republicans offered a Band-Aid; those in the House wanted to treat the wound.  It would have been no excuse for shirking their duty and not passing a bill, but the Republicans in the lower chamber were on the right track. We have to deal sooner or later with the federal government's runaway spending, but there's no appetite for that in Congress. There never will be.  In fact, for all the talk about whether to raise taxes on the wealthy, the real sticking point in this debate was what to do about spending we can no longer afford -- especially on programs such as Medicare and Social Security.  Lawmakers in both parties, who respect and fear the senior citizen lobby, won't have this conversation. So they would just as soon keep Americans distracted with an argument over who should pay what in taxes.  Don't be taken in. What Americans should really be thinking about at this moment is where all that money is going and whether we can keep paying those bills no matter how high the tax rates soar.  Remember how it works with your own household budget. It's not only how much comes in that matters; just as important is how much goes out.  The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of Ruben Navarrette.
(CNN) -- Football's world governing body FIFA has provisionally suspended outgoing Executive Committee member Chuck Blazer for 90 days "based on the fact that various breaches of the Code of Ethics appear to have been committed" by the American.  The former general secretary of CONCACAF, the body which governs football in North and Central America and the Caribbean, has been barred from taking part in "any kind of football-related activity" for a maximum period of 90 days.  The decision was taken by Hans-Joachim Eckert, the chairman of the adjudicatory chamber of the FIFA Ethics Committee -- which opened investigation proceedings against Blazer, 68, in response to a report filed by the CONCACAF Integrity Committee last month.  "The decision was taken following a request made by the acting deputy chairman of the investigatory chamber of the Ethics Committee, Robert Torres, based on the fact that various breaches of the FIFA Code of Ethics appear to have been committed by Chuck Blazer and that a decision on the main issue could not be taken early enough," read a Fifa statement.  Read: Blazer to step down from CONCACAF  The announcement comes less than one week after fellow FIFA executive committee member Vernon Manilal Fernando of Sri Lanka was banned for eight years for unethical behaviour.  The CONCACAF report alleged that Blazer, who has been provisionally banned pending a full disciplinary hearing, received at least $15 million in addition to other funds that were used to buy and rent luxury apartments.  Blazer, who has been the most senior American official at FIFA for the last 16 years, had previously said that he will give up his seat on the Executive Committee when his term expires at the end of this month.  He resigned as CONCACAF's general secretary in 2011, after serving with the body for 21 years.  In April, the head of CONCACAF's integrity committee, David Simmons, described Blazer and his former boss, Trinidadian Jack Warner, as being 'fraudulent in their management' of the continental organization.  The former colleagues fell out in 2011 when Blazer reported Warner and Asian Football Confederation chief Mohamed bin Hammam to FIFA's Ethics Committee, accusing the duo of trying to bribe Caribbean delegated to support the Qatari bin Hammam in that year's FIFA presidential election.  Blazer's accusations led to the downfall of bin Hammam, the resignation of Warner as a FIFA vice president and CONCACAF leader, and sanctions against several Caribbean football officials.  Now however, Blazer finds himself in the dock alongside Warner.  Last month, Simmons accused both men of abusing their "position and power" -- with Warner said to have failed to disclose the creation of a $25.9 million CONCACAF center of excellence on his land, while Blazer was accused of mismanaging funds.  Both men have denied any wrongdoing.  FIFA has been affected by numerous corruption scandals in recent times, which do not only involve the likes of Warner, Blazer and Manilal.  Last week, former president Joao Havelange - who ruled the organization between 1974 and 1988 - resigned as FIFA's honorary president after the 96-year-old was ruled to have taken bribes in a report by ethics chairman Eckert.
London, England (CNN) -- When 23-year-old Danielle Miller packed her bags for a holiday in Cape Town, South Africa, sun and sand were the last things on her mind.  Instead of working on her tan in the country's most popular tourist destination, the diplomacy student from the University of Kentucky, United States, spent two months as a teacher's assistant in the apartheid-government-built township of Manenberg.  But far from being the odd one out, Miller is part of a growing number of women replacing their holidays with volunteer work, often in remote and far-flung regions of the world.  Roughly 70 percent of all volunteer travelers are women, according to tour operators and industry experts. It's a huge gender gap in the travel sector, which, apart from business travel, is seen as relatively gender neutral.  Alexia Nestora, former director of volunteer travel organization i-to-i North America and founder of the blog, Voluntourism Gal, says there is no doubt the majority of voluntourists are women.  Have you been on a volunteer vacation? Share your photos and video on iReport and you could be featured on CNN.  She told CNN: "Definitely in the last three years there has been an increase in women, especially over 50.  "Now tourism companies are catering for an older niche and they seem to be mostly women, a large number either divorced, widowed or retired and looking to start something new."  She said: "Women really want to connect to people and relate to different cultures when they travel, they don't want a fly-by experience. Voluntourism gives them this."  This was certainly true for 52-year-old administrator Caroline Bedford from Northamptonshire, England. In November 2008, Bedford traveled to Nepal and spent a month working at Kathmandu's Naxal orphanage.  "It's an incredibly fulfilling experience," Bedford told CNN. "There's an emotional involvement and connection that you will never have when you take a regular holiday. I still get emails from people in Nepal giving me updates, I still feel deeply emotionally attached," she said.  But apart from altruistic motives, some academics say there is evidence women sign up for more self-serving reasons, often as a way of offsetting "guilt."  "These holidays offer women a sense of empowerment and a sense of freedom," Professor Annette Pritchard, Director of the Welsh Center for Tourism Research and author of "Tourism and Gender" told CNN.  "It's a liberation from the day-to-day routines, but more importantly it's a guilt free way of enjoying the time off," she said.  Nancy McGehee, Associate Professor in Tourism at Virginia Tech university in the United States, agrees. Her studies of voluntourists show that guilt is a major factor for women when choosing how to holiday.  She said to CNN: "Women are less likely to 'gift' themselves a trip or holiday than men. In some ways, voluntourism is a way of enjoying your break without feeling selfish."  But guilt aside, there are practical reasons why such a large number of women choose voluntourism, namely safety.  "Voluntourism is a safe way for women travelers to culturally immerse themselves and experience a new place," McGehee said.  "There is a sense of camaraderie with both their fellow travelers and with the local people they are working with," she added.  This point rings true for a lot of female voluntourists, including Miller, whose neighborhood in Cape Town was far from safe for a young woman traveling alone.  She said: "If I had the choice between backpacking or volunteering for a month I'd choose the latter. Volunteering I was in a group and a community and I felt safe.  "As a volunteer you're allowed access to places and experiences you never would as a tourist. People can be very on guard around tourists, but people in South Africa called me sister, they were like my family," she continued.  For men, far from being less caring, the lack of numbers in volunteering could be down to a lack of confidence in their caring skills. This is something Sallie Grayson, program director at the volunteer holiday company People and Places, has come across.  She told CNN: "We can't point to one thing and say that's why men don't participate as much, but one reason seems to be that men aren't as clear as women about what skills they have to offer.  "We have men applying to work in business projects but they rule themselves out of working with children or in healthcare because they don't think they can," she explained.  But the numbers are shifting. Already People and Places has seen a two percentage point increase in the number of its male volunteers for the next six months. That's something Grayson says is down to more information getting out there and women making their partners come along on trips.  "The involvement of men is growing, we don't think it will ever be equal, but it's getting bigger," she said. "We need more male volunteers; they can make a huge difference."
The struggling IT services and cloud computing company is being acquired by a consortium of private equity groups, including Bain Capital and Golden Gate Capital, for $46.25 per share.  That represents just a measly 2% premium over Friday's closing price -- an unusually small markup and a sign of how badly BMC ( Fortune 500) and Hewlett-Packard ( Fortune 500).  "BMC believes the opportunity to become a private company will provide additional flexibility and position us to invest more strategically to drive powerful innovation and deliver cutting edge customer solutions," BMC CEO Bob Beauchamp said in a statement.  The move follows an effort begun last summer by hedge fund Elliott Management to push the software company into taking action. Elliott Management bought a 9.6% stake in the company and added two directors to the company's board.  The hedge fund applauded the sale, saying the offer price represents "a substantial premium to BMC's unaffected stock price." That price is hard to determine, but the private equity firms' offer is about 11% higher than BMC's share price on Sept. 28, 2012, the day before news reports first circulated that BMC would pursue a sale.  The deal serves as yet another sign that the private equity industry is returning after a long hiatus that began during the Great Recession. In addition to BMC, other high profile PE deals include moves to take Heinz ( Fortune 500) and Dell ( Fortune 500) private.
MBIA will receive $1.6 billion in cash from Bank of America and a $500 million line of credit as part of the settlement, which awaits approval from New York state regulators, the companies announced Monday.  The deal will save MBIA's insurance unit from being seized by a state regulator. There were reports that the New York State Department of Financial Services, which regulates New York insurers, could take control of the MBIA unit because it was running out of cash.  In a February regulatory filing, MBIA had warned that failure to reach a "settlement with Bank of America within a reasonable period of time" would raise substantial doubt about its ability to remain in business.  The legal case revolved around $20 billion in subprime mortgages that were bundled into securities and sold to investors by home lender Countrywide Financial, which was purchased by Bank of America in 2008. MBIA provided guarantees on the performance of those securities.  When the housing bubble burst and sent foreclosures skyrocketing, the value of the mortgage securities fell dramatically, leaving MBIA responsible for the losses. However, MBIA claimed that Countrywide had misrepresented the quality of the mortgage loans in the securities.  As part of Monday's settlement, BofA will also remit $137 million worth of bonds it purchased from MBIA in 2012 and terminate the credit-default swaps it purchased from MBIA on mortgage-backed securities. In exchange, MBIA will grant BofA warrants to purchase up to 4.9% of the firm at a strike price of $9.59. MBIA shares closed at $14.29 on Monday.  In a bid to put the housing crisis behind it, Bank of America has been settling numerous cases involving actions by Countrywide. In January, it reached a $10.3 billion settlement with Fannie Mae over questionable home loans.
(CNN) -- Canadian singing sensation Justin Bieber was left shaken but unhurt after an overenthusiastic fan jumped on stage during his concert in Dubai and attempted to grab him mid song.  The gig had already caused controversy among fans after Bieber arrived on stage two hours late.  The incident, the latest of a slew of controversies on the singer's "Believe" tour, sparked a buzz on social media sites, with his fans, or 'Beliebers', rushing to check their idol was safe.  CNN looked at social media sites to see what happened and how fans, detractors, and the teen superstar himself, responded.  Mobile users, click here to see the Storify.
Pretoria, South Africa (CNN) -- Model Reeva Steenkamp was shot four times through the bathroom door at the home of Olympian Oscar Pistorius, a South African official familiar with the case told CNN on Monday.  She was alive after she was shot and was carried downstairs by Pistorius, said the official, who was not authorized to release details to the media.  A blood-stained cricket bat has also emerged as key evidence in the case, according to the City Press newspaper of Johannesburg.  Detectives are working to determine whether the bat was used to attack Steenkamp or she used it in self-defense, the newspaper reported, citing a source with inside knowledge of the case. Detectives are also looking into the possibility that Pistorius used the bat to break down the bathroom door.  The details are the latest to emerge in the shooting death that has roiled the nation and left South Africans asking what went so terribly wrong inside the upscale Pretoria home of the man nicknamed "Blade Runner" for his lightning-fast prosthetic legs.  The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said there were indications the 29-year-old model intended to stay the night at the house: She had an overnight bag and her iPad.  Opinion: Pistorius case and the plague of violence against women  Authorities have released little about a possible motive in the Valentine's Day shooting, while local media have reported that Pistorius had mistaken his girlfriend for an intruder. South African authorities have stressed that the scenario did not come from them, and said there was no evidence of forced entry at the home.  Police have charged Pistorius with murder, and he will appear in court Tuesday for a bail hearing. South African prosecutors have said they intend to upgrade the charge to premeditated murder, but have not released further details.  Pistorius, 26, has rejected the murder allegation "in the strongest terms," his agent said in a statement.  The same day Pistorius returns to court, Steenkamp will be buried in a private service in her hometown of Port Elizabeth.  Her burial Tuesday will come two days after South Africa's national broadcaster aired a pre-recorded reality TV show featuring Steenkamp discussing her exit from "Tropika Island of Treasure," on which local celebrities compete for prize money.  The decision to air the program took "much deliberation," and "this week's episode will be dedicated to Reeva's memory," said Samantha Moon, the executive producer.  The shooting has stunned South Africa, where Pistorius is a national hero as the first disabled athlete to compete in the able-bodied Olympic Games. He competed in the London Games as well as winning two gold medals in the Paralympic Games.  Headlines about the case have dominated in the days since Pistorius was arrested, though tight-lipped authorities have revealed little about what, if anything, the track star has said.  Reports say Pistorius and Steenkamp became an item around November and were popular in South African social circles.  The night before the shooting, Steenkamp appeared to be looking forward to Valentine's Day.  "What do you have up your sleeve for your love tomorrow?" she asked her Twitter followers the day before. "Get excited."  Steenkamp was found in a pool of blood at Pistorius' home Thursday morning. Neighbors alerted authorities to the early morning shooting, saying they had "heard things earlier," police spokeswoman Denise Beukes has said. She did not clarify what the neighbors reported they heard.  Authorities also have not said whether Pistorius called for help.  Pictures of his walk to a police car, his head covered by a sweatshirt, have flashed repeatedly across television screens.  On Sunday, Pistorius canceled his appearances in five upcoming races.  The move is meant to help Pistorius focus on the legal proceedings and "help and support all those involved as they try to come to terms with this very difficult and distressing situation," said Peet Van Zyl of Pistorius' management company, In Site Athlete Management.  CNN's Robyn Curnow reported from South Africa; Chelsea J. Carter and Faith Karimi reported from Atlanta.
Editor's note: Parag Khanna is a Senior Research Fellow at the New America Foundation and Senior Fellow at the Singapore Institute of International Affairs. His books include "The Second World," "How to Run the World," and "Hybrid Reality."  Yangon, Myanmar (CNN) -- Call it a case for evolution instead of revolution. While the Arab world continues in the throes of violence and uncertainty, Myanmar is undergoing incremental change -- and almost everyone seems to want it that way.  The government is lightening up: holding elections, freeing political prisoners, abolishing censorship, legalizing protests, opening to investment and tourists and welcoming back exiles. But the people still tread lightly, careful not to overstep or demand too much. Still, the consensus is clear: Change in Myanmar is "irreversible."  Read more: Aung San Suu Kyi and the power of unity  As the British Raj's jungle frontier, Burma was a key Asian battleground resisting the Japanese occupation of Southeast Asia during World War II. As with many post-colonial countries, the euphoria of independence and democracy in 1948 gave way in just over a decade to the 1962 coup in which General Ne Win nationalized the economy and abolished most institutions except the army.  Non-alignment gave way to isolationism. Like Syria or Uzbekistan, Myanmar became an ancient Silk Road passageway that almost voluntarily choked itself off, choosing the unique path of a Buddhist state conducting genocide, slavery, and human trafficking.  The military junta began its increasingly cozy rapproachment with Deng Xiaoping's China in the 1970s, just as China was opening to the world, and used cash from its Golden Triangle drug-running operations to pay for Chinese weapons.  Mass protests, crackdowns and another coup in 1988 led to a rebranding of the junta as the State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC) and the country's official renaming as the Union of Myanmar.  The 1990 elections, in which Aung San Suu Kyi's National League for Democracy (NLD) won a majority of the seats, were annulled by the SLORC, which continued to rule until 2011 when it was formally disbanded. Most international sanctions on Myanmar have now been lifted.  Read more: Myanmar: Is now a good time to go?  In just the past few years, Myanmar has survived a succession of natural and man-made ravages, from the brutal crackdown on the Saffron Revolution of 2007 (led by Buddhist monks but more widely supported in protest against rising fuel prices and economic mismanagement), to Cyclone Nargis (which killed an estimated 200,000 people in 2008) to civil wars between the government's army and ethnic groups such as the Kachin in the north and Shan and Karen in the east, and communal violence between the Muslim Rohingya (ethnic Bengalis) and Buddhist Rakhine in the west.  There are still approximately 150,000 Karen refugees in Thailand (and over 300,000 total refugees on the Thai-Burmese border) and more than 100,000 displaced Rohinya living in camps in Sittwe. So difficult is holding Myanmar together that even Aung San Suu Kyi, who helps lead the national reconciliation process, ironically advocated the use of the army (which kept her under house arrest for almost two decades) to pacify the rebellions.  Though sectarian conflict between Muslims and Buddhists in Rakhine underscores the Myanmar's tenuous search for national unity, the genuine efforts at religious pluralism are reminiscent of neighboring India: Every religion is officially recognized, and days are given off for observance. Surrounding Yangon's downtown City Hall is not only the giant Sule Pagoda but also a mosque, synagogue, church and Jain temple. The roundabout is therefore a symbol of the country's diversity -- but also the place where protesters flock when the government doesn't live up to promises.  Scarred from decades of oppressive and ideological rule and still beset by conflict, it is therefore against all odds that Myanmar would become the most talked about frontier market of the moment, a top Christmas holiday destination and a case study in democratic transitions. Myanmar's political scene is now a vibrant but cacophonous discourse involving the still-powerful army; upstart parliament; repatriated civilian advisers; flourishing civil society, including human rights groups, ambitious business community, the Buddhist religious community, and a feisty media (especially online).  The parliament is pushing for accountability in telecom and energy contracts, and its speaker, Shwe Mann, is already maneuvering to challenge the chairman of his Union Solidarity and Development Party (USDP) -- current president Thein Sein -- in the 2015 elections.  In the meantime, however, the establishment in Yangon and the new capital of Napyidaw need to focus much more on building capacity. Thein Sein, who traded in his uniform for indigenous attire in 2011, has reshuffled the Cabinet to make room for functional experts in the energy and economic portfolios. He's even spearheaded an anti-corruption drive, admitting recently that Myanmar's "governance falls well below international standards." By many accounts he is also very open to advice on investment and other reforms.  He will need it, as Myanmar faces crucial tests of its international credibility in the coming years. In 2013, Myanmar will play host to the World Economic Forum (WEF) as well as the Southeast Asian Games. In 2014 it will chair the ASEAN regional group, and in 2015 it is expected to enter a new ASEAN Free Trade Area.  The military's power is still pervasive, placing it somewhere on the spectrum between Indonesia, where military influence has been rolled back, and Pakistan, where the military still dominates. On the streets, it's often difficult to know who is in charge.  One numerological fetish led to the driving side being unilaterally changed, making Myanmar the rare place where the steering wheel is (mostly) on the right, and cars drive (mostly) on the right. At least a dozen official and private newspapers (though private daily papers are not allowed yet) are on offer from meandering street hawkers, while you inch through Yangon's increasingly dense daily traffic jams.  At this time of year, visitors to Burma enjoy crisp, smoky morning air and dry, starry nights. Yangon is undergoing a construction boom, with faded colonial embassies turned into bustling banks, the national independence column being refurbished and redesigned with a park, and tycoons building columned mansions near downtown -- and seeking Buddhist blessings by pledging lavish donations for the construction of even more monasteries and pagodas.  By 2020, the population of Yangon could easily double from the current 5 million, at which point it may look like a mix of Calcutta and Kuala Lumpur.  Thant Myint-U, the grandson of former U.N. Secretary-General U Thant and noted historian of modern Burma, now wears several hats related to ethnic reconciliation, foreign donor trust funds and urban conservation. He says that as foreign aid flows grow from trickles into a flood, they have to be systematically focused on sustainable employment creation and infrastructure. USAID has pledged to spend more than $150 million in Myanmar in the next three years.  Outside of Yangon, the pace of Burmese society slows to a timeless pace -- as do Internet connections. On village roads, cycle rickshaws and monks with parasols amble by fruit vendors and car part stalls. Whether at the Dhammayazika Pagoda in Bagan or Mandalay Hill in that city, locals enjoy watching sunrises and sunsets as much as tourists.  Traveling around Myanmar, one observes the paradox of a country that has massive potential yet still needs just about everything. Yangon's vegetable market is a maze of tented alleys overflowing with cabbage, pineapples, eggplant and flowers, but they are still transported by wheelbarrows and bicycles. Ox-drawn ploughs still power farming in much of the country, meaning agricultural output of rice, beans and other staples could grow immensely through mechanization.  Similarly, the British-era light-rail loop circling Yangon takes about three hours to ride once around, with no linking bus services into downtown. But with cars already clogging the city, a major transport overhaul is essential. The communications sector actually needs to be re-invented. At present, the country's Internet and mobile phone penetration are only just growing; both are still governed by India's 1886 Telegraph Act. Mobile penetration is only 3 million but could easily grow to 30 million (half the population) within the next couple of years, as the price of SIM cards come down (so far from $2,000 to about $200), and foreign telecoms are allowed in to provide data coverage.  With sanctions lifted, foreign investment is now pouring in from Western nations, in addition to the players who have been making inroads for years such as China, Thailand and Singapore. The paradox, however, is that Myanmar lacks the infrastructure (physical and institutional) to absorb all the investor interest.  Major nations have thus focused on special economic zones that they themselves effectively run. The way Japan has moved into Myanmar, one would think that its World War II imperialism has been forgotten. After their major bet on the Thilawa special economic zone south of Yangon, Japanese contractors have plans to deepen the Yangon River's estuary so that cargo ships can sail directly up to the city's shores and offload more containers of cars that are already being briskly snapped up at busy dealerships.  Besides natural gas and agriculture, everyone agrees that tourism will comprise an ever-larger share of the country's GDP. Especially with much of the country off-limits to foreigners due to security restrictions and the military's economic operations, tourists already clog all existing suitable hotels in Yangon, Bagan and Mandalay, meaning a massive upgrade is needed in the hospitality sector.  Annual tourist visits are climbing 25% annually to an estimated 400,000 for 2012. Daily flights arrive packed from around the region, with longer-haul routes beginning from as far afield as Istanbul and Doha.  Still, Myanmar is a traveler's dream come true. In Bagan, you can walk or take a sunrise jog around countless pagodas that feel like they haven't been touched in 800 years -- some actually haven't. There is also the sacred and enchanting Golden Rock; the pristine beaches of Ngwe Saung, which rival the best of Thailand and the Philippines; the temperate climate of Inle Lake; the Himalayan foothills near Putao in far northern Kachin state where one can trek; the rich dynastic history of Mandalay; and the languorous Irrawaddy River cruises that harken to George Orwell's "Burmese Days."  Yangon has a pleasant charm and gentle energy, with vast gardens and riverside walks, the grandeur of centuries-old monuments such as the Shwedegon Pagoda, a fast-growing cultural scene of art galleries and music performances, and a melting pot population of all Myanmar's tribes as well as industrious overseas Indians and Chinese, who make up 5% of the nation's population.  Mandalay in particular is where one feels the depth of China's demographic penetration into Myanmar, owing not only to recent decades of commercial expansion from gems trading to real estate but also centuries of seasonal migrations across the rugged natural border with Yunnan province. Some have begun to call the Shan region "Yunnan South."  The combination of the Saffron Revolution, civil strife, sanctions, its economic lag behind the rest of ASEAN, and the status of becoming a captive resource supplier to China all played crucial roles in Myanmar's opening. China has traditionally been a kingmaker in isolated and sanctioned countries and well-placed to capitalize on the infrastructural and extractive needs of emerging economies as well.  For China, Myanmar represents a crucial artery to evade the "Malacca trap" represented by its dependence on shipping transit through the Straits of Malacca. In 2011 China was still far and away the largest foreign investor in Myanmar, bringing in $5 billion (of a total of $9 billion) across their 2,000-kilometer (1250-mile)-long border. The massive ongoing investments include 63 hydropower projects, a 2,400-kilometer (1500-mile) Sittwe-to-Kunming oil pipeline from the Bay of Bengal and a proposed gas pipeline to China's Yunnan beginning at Myanmar's Ramree Island -- not to mention an entire military outfitted with Chinese tanks, helicopters, boats and planes.  Myanmar's opening, however, is strongly motivated by an anti-Chinese sentiment that is part of a much wider global blowback against its commercial and strategic encroachment. Even well-kept generals are fundamentally Burmese nationalists and awoke to the predicament of total economic and strategic dependence on China. The government has taken major steps to correct this excessive tilt, suspending a major hydroelectric dam project at Myitsone and re-evaluating Wanbao Mining company's giant copper mine concession near Monywa.  Myanmar is now deftly playing the same multi-alignment game mastered by countries such as Kazakhstan in trying to escape the Soviet-Russian sphere of influence: courting all sides and gaining whatever one can from multiple great powers and neighbors while giving up as little autonomy as possible.  India sees Myanmar as the crucial gateway for its "Look East" policy and is offering substantial investments in oil and gas as well as port construction and information technology; Europe has become a larger investor, especially Great Britain; Russia is being courted as a new arms supplier; Japan is viewing Myanmar as its new Thailand for automobile production; and of course, U.S. President Barack Obama visited in December, paving the way not only for greater U.S. investment but even for Myanmar to potentially participate in the Cobra Gold military exercises held annually with America's regional allies.  Obama was not only the first U.S. president to visit Myanmar but also the first to call it by that name, conceding ground in a long-running dispute. The administration hopes that North Korea, Asia's still frozen outcast, will learn the lessons from Myanmar's steady but determined opening.  But countries that are playing multi-alignment don't have to thaw domestically -- witness Saudi Arabia and Kazakhstan. Myanmar is simultaneously undergoing political liberalization and international rehabilitation -- a tricky and laudable feat for sure but not one North Korea is likely to emulate entirely. What the two do have in common, however, is the growing realization that having China as a neighbor is both a blessing and a curse.  During my visit to the "Genius Language School," where university students go for professional English tutoring, I asked the assembled round table whether they were happy that Obama came to visit and whether they considered America a friend. All giggled and chanted: "Yes."  Then I asked, "Are you afraid of China?" And the answer came in immediate, resounding unison: "Yes!"  The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of Parag Khanna.
Staples ( Fortune 500) says it is the first major U.S. retailer to sell a 3-D printer. It began selling The Cube, made by 3D Systems (  While 3-D printers have long been used in industrial manufacturing, a recent "maker" movement is slowly popularizing in-home versions of the devices.  The Cube, like other 3-D printers, is a machine that creates physical, three-dimensional objects. The printer uses a digital design file as a blueprint, then builds the item layer by layer with plastic. Users can print anything they can design, including action figures, iPhone docks and coffee cup holders.  The Cube can print items up to five-and-a-half inches tall, wide and long in 16 different colors, and it comes packaged with 25 free design templates. Shares of Cube maker 3D Systems rose 4% after the announcement but ended the day up 1%. Staples stock closed nearly 3% higher.  George Young, a partner at 3D Systems shareholder Villere & Co., says the Staples announcement validates 3D Systems' mission, "because they've been saying their technology can cover all ends of the spectrum -- from manufacturing lines to consumers' homes. And a retailer like Staples is obviously cognizant about what their customers want."  3D Systems says it is devoted to the "democratization" of 3-D printers, making the complex and expensive technology available to the masses. But the company faces a lot of upstart competition.  Perhaps the buzziest 3-D printer company is Brooklyn, N.Y.-based Makerbot, which unveiled its $2,800 "Replicator 2x" at the Consumer Electronics Show in January.  Following Makerbot's success, crowdfunding site Kickstarter quickly became full of similarly named rivals: Printrbot, TangiBot, Ultra-Bot, RigidBot, Gigabot, and Bukobot.  While many 3-D printer owners may be using the devices to prototype inventions or simply have fun making plastic toys, other industries are tapping into the printers' potential. Chefs are using the printers to create intricately designed food. Doctors are even experimenting with advanced versions of the machines to make artificial organs and prosthetic limbs.  In some cases, 3-D designs have been controversial. Makerbot found itself under pressure to crack down on downloadable designs for printable gun parts late last year, after the school shooting in Newtown, Conn. MakerBot's design file repository, called Thingiverse, had long prohibited "the creation of weapons" -- but they were loosely enforced before the crackdown in December.
Editor's note: Each month, CNN's Kristie Lu Stout sits down with three China experts to discuss what's really driving the world power and economic giant. This month's episode will focus on Chinese migrant workers. See here for air times for CNN's "On China."  Beijing (CNN) -- Liu Ming Xing is a student at Jin Wei Elementary School, where her favorite class is music.  The 13-year-old loves the class. "It makes me feel good," she said. And she says about her school life at Jin Wei: "This place is good, I like it. I want to stay here."  But she may have to leave. Liu's family migrated to the Beijing from the countryside for work, and Jin Wei is a school for migrants. But the surrounding community, once filled with families like Liu's, is under pressure as the government began dismantling the neighborhood to make way for new development. The school, funded by migrant parents, may soon close.  "The children of the rural migrants won't be able to continue to attend school in this area," said human rights lawyer Zhang Zhiqiang, referring to the area where Liu's family lives.  In China, families are registered as rural or urban. When rural migrants move to the cities they live in a twilight zone: They can't access healthcare, social security or even public education as part of the nation's "hukou" system, which requires household registration. Migrant workers still must be registered in their rural town of origin, not the city to which they move -- which keeps public services out of reach for many who have flocked to cities for work.  "What makes this bad is that it violates the rights of migrants to live and work here," Zhang said. "Secondly, and more importantly, it violates children's rights to get compulsory education because when parents are forced to move back to their hometown.  Beijing has made urbanization a main goal for increasing domestic consumption and closing the wealth gap. Hundreds of millions have moved to the cities from the countryside in search of jobs. Last year, the urban population of the world's most populous nation exceeded the rural population for the first time, according to the National Bureau of Statistics.  But activists say that the government's own policies are forcing these migrants out of cities and creating an underclass in China. About 250 million people -- equivalent to about 80% of the population of the U.S. -- are migrant workers in China.  It's the children of migrant workers, like Liu, who are often hardest hit. "They don't have a lot of connections back home. Their kids don't speak much of local dialect," Zhang said. "The government is forcing these people to move elsewhere without understanding their difficulties."  But registration of children is tied to their parents, so children of migrant workers eventually will have to return to their parents' home village to register and continue their education.  Beijing has pledged to reform the hukou system but is hampered because many social services are funded by local cities rather than the national government.  "The government is trying. They're definitely making efforts, they realize that this is a big problem," William Nee of the China Labour Bulletin said. "The problem is the finances of the health care scheme and education are all done at the local level, so I think it's very difficult for the government at the national level to say, 'Okay, let's just reform the hukou system'."  The political cost of reforming the hukou system is onerous. "The mayors and party secretaries of many major cities are concerned that if hukou is freed up, there will be a huge fiscal burden in providing services for these migrants," said Yukon Huang, senior associate of the Carnegie Endowment and former World Bank director of China.  "If you ask the residents, the established residents of the major cities, they would say I don't want more people coming, this may mean fewer job opportunities for us," Huang added.  "They also associate inflows of migrant workers in terms of crime, pollution or congestion. So this is going to be a political issue. And I think it is a political issue that requires very careful management," he said. "China has been very successful in avoiding some of what I call 'the urban sprawls' in places like Calcutta or Manila or even Bangkok. In that sense, it's going to be a new challenge for China."  If reform is on the horizon, it may come too late for Liu's family, who is watching their neighborhood being torn down as her father recovers from heart disease. "I just hope that my father can get well as soon as possible and that we will be okay," said Liu, breaking down in tears.  CNN's Kristie Lu Stout and CY Xu contributed to this report.
That's less than half of the $1.6 billion legal tab associated with the Lehman Brothers' bankruptcy - the largest legal bill in history. But it's a considerable sum that's still growing as efforts to make Madoff investors whole drag on. To date, court-appointed trustee Irving Picard has collected $9.3 billion in cash and assets and repaid $5.4 billion of that to victims.  The bulk of the fees associated with the case, $384 million, have been paid to Picard's law firm, BakerHostetler. Another $292 million has been divided among dozens of other law firms, and $25 million went to "general administrative" costs. Funding these payouts is the Securities Investor Protection Corporation, which collects dues from Wall Street firms that are used to restore lost assets to investors burned by bankruptcy or fraud.  The trustee files a bill every few months that must be approved by a federal bankruptcy court judge. Ten have been submitted so far and all have been approved. The latest tab, which covers a five-month billing period and comes to nearly $50 million, was filed last week. The total comes to 135,00 hours of legal services, which works out to about $364 per hour. Picard alone makes $890 per hour. He billed for 728 hours of work and earned a total of $648,000.  He and his colleagues spent about $8 million on various business expenses as they searched for the lost funds. That includes $400,000 for out-of-town travel, $67,000 in copying costs, $161,000 for online research, $1,206 on business meals, and $12.60 on faxes.  Most of the money Picard's lawyers has collected came through settlements with former investors who withdrew more from Madoff's firm than they deposited. Even though many of these investors claim to have known nothing of the Ponzi scheme, the trustee is suing them for benefiting from it.  Forensic accountant Sam Goldfarb, of Goldfarb LLC, said that much of the fees were probably paid to accountants like himself, who can earn between $150 an hour and $700 an hour untangling a mess like the Madoff scam. Forensic accounting is the means by which the trustee determines which of the investors are net winners from investing in Madoff's firm.  "In order to take out more than you put in, you're really only taking that money from other victims, because Madoff didn't make any money," said Goldfarb. "You're the beneficiary of other victims' losses. You're the beneficiary of the fraud."  Settlements have played a huge role in reclaiming the stolen money, as the trustee goes after individuals and companies that may have profited from the scheme. The largest settlement occurred in 2011, when the widow of Jeffry Picower, believed to be the biggest beneficiary of Madoff's schemes apart from the Madoffs, surrendered a whopping $5 billion from his estate.  In the pursuit of ill-gotten gains, the trustee has also sued various companies for allegedly profiting from the Ponzi scheme, but with mixed success. The trustee settled with Tremont Group Holdings, one of the largest groups of feeder funds in the Madoff case, for more than $1 billion in 2011. But suits totaling more than $20 billion against UBS ( Fortune 500) which are also accused of profiting from the scam, were tossed out by a federal judge in 2011.  In 2012, a federal judge also threw out Picard's $20 billion suit against Italian bank UniCredit S.p.A ( Austrian banker Sonja Kohn. Both were accused of recruiting well-heeled European victims for Madoff's scheme. The judge rejected Picard's accusation that Kohn and UniCredit participated in organized crime.  Additionally, the trustee sued Mets owners Fred Wilpon and Saul Katz, who were also Madoff investors, seeking $1 billion. But Picard settled with Wilpon and Katz last year for just $67 million.  The trustee also sued the owners of the Mets, Fred Wilpon and Saul Katz, who were also Madoff investors, seeking $1 billion fromBut Picard settled with Wilpon and Katz last year for just $67 million.  Madoff's scheme came crashing down with his arrest on Dec. 11, 2008. He pleaded guilty three months later and was sentenced to 150 years. He is currently languishing in a federal prison in Butner, N.C.  His brother Peter recently began a 10-year sentence for helping to cover up the scheme.
(CNN) -- Nurburgring was confirmed Thursday as the venue for the 2013 German Grand Prix after reaching a deal with F1 chief Bernie Ecclestone.  The famous circuit, nicknamed the "Green Hell", alternates hosting its home grand prix with Hockenheim, but financial problems left this year's staging in doubt.  A statement on the official Nurburgring website said: "the long period of uncertainty regarding the venue for the pinnacle of motor sport in Germany is over."  Thomas Schmidt, the managing director of the circuit, thanked Ecclestone for his support.  "With his commitment to the legendary circuit, he makes a significant and valuable contribution to the Nurburgring," he said.  Ecclestone granted the hosting rights for this season rather than passing them over to Hockenheim to run the German Grand Prix for the second straight year.  "I appreciate the Nurburgring and its history very much," Ecclestone was quoted.  "Even today, this circuit makes the highest demands on drivers and teams."  Tickets for the event from July 5-7 will officially go on sale next Monday.  Lewis Hamilton won the 2011 race for McLaren, but will return in 2013 driving for the German car maker Mercedes.  Meanwhile, Red Bull principal Christian Horner has extended his deal with the team after leading them to double world title successes for the past three seasons.  The 39-year-old Englishman has been at the helm since the team was launched by Austrian billionaire owner Dietrich Mateschitz in 2005.  Horner enjoyed success as a young driver in junior levels of motor sport before forging his career in team ownership and management.  The new "multi-year" contract for Horner was confirmed on the official F1 website Thursday.  Red Bull has dominated F1 since 2010, with Germany's Sebastian Vettel claiming a hat-trick of world titles with the team taking the constructors' titles to back him up.  Vettel and Mark Webber will again be the driver line-up for 2013, with their new RB9 car set to be unveiled at their headquarters in Milton Keynes in England Sunday.  Vettel narrowly held off Fernando Alonso to win the 2012 title and the Spanish Ferrari star will be hoping his new machinery for the coming season gives him the opportunity to go one better.  Ferrari will launch the F138 at their test track in Maranello, Italy Friday.  It derives its name from a combination of the current years and the number of cylinders in its engine, the team said in advance.  It will be the 59th car raced by Ferrari in F1 and Alonso will first test it at Barcelona on February 19.  Before that, Felipe Massa and test driver Pedro de la Rosa will put it through its paces at Jerez.  McLaren unveiled its new car, the Mercedes-powered MP4-2 Thursday, hoping they will start 2013 as they finished 2012 with victories in the United States and Brazil.  "It is exactly the same color scheme and I think it looks similar to last year, but it is completely different to last year under the skin," Jenson Button told AFP.  "And that's good for all of us," added the Briton who will be partnered by Mexico's Sergio Perez for the new season after the departure of Hamilton.
Editor's note: Robert Fowler is a Canadian former U.N. envoy to Niger who was kidnapped in that country in 2008 and held hostage in the Sahara. He later wrote a book about his experiences, "A Season in Hell: my 130 days in the Sahara with Al Qaeda."  (CNN) -- Last month's assault and massacre at the In-Amenas gas plant in Algeria by an al Qaeda battalion led by Moktar Belmoktar put into sharp focus the growing threat of Islamist jihadists in north and west Africa. It also brought back vivid memories of my own 130-day kidnap ordeal also at the hands of Belmoktar's al Qaeda group in Niger and Mali in 2008/09. Here is an extract from my book...  With some ceremony, a DVD was produced and inserted into the laptop drive and we were maneuvered around to have pride of place in front of the screen. The others pressed around, the younger ones in front. There were three or four pre-pubescent boys among them, their faces rapt with anticipation as their screen-lit faces excitedly tried to watch us and the laptop simultaneously.  'Mr. Marlboro': The veteran jihadist behind the attack in Algeria  Soon we heard a loud pulsing, urgent, musical beat and the screen was filled with a black flag, the lower half of which was covered with white Arabic script and in the upper portion, there was a globe surmounted by an AK-47 assault rifle; the Al Qaeda banner. Using the traditional and mandatory Islamic opening, a voice intoned in Arabic, "In the name of Allah the most merciful..." and the centre of the screen began to fill with images and vignettes of all kinds of horrors: those aircraft slamming into the twin towers. US and allied vehicles being destroyed in Iraq and Afghanistan by IEDs (Improvised Explosive Devices); video cameras slaved to the sights of Dragunov sniper rifles blasting the heads off GIs and then murdering those who came to their assistance; suicide bombers driving explosive-laden trucks through fences and into buildings or crowds immediately followed by massive explosions. Sometimes such scenes would carry sub-titles giving the date and location of the horror. In other instances, there would be clips of the happy, excited suicide bomber explaining his joy at the prospect of martyring himself for such a noble purpose.  There would also be clips of their "Great Emir", Bin Laden, uttering in his quiet and reasonable sounding voice his latest threats to tear the heart out of the degenerate West. Then some stocky, heavily bearded, white robed and turbaned American, who we were told was Adam Gadahn, a Jewish Californian convert to Islam and Al Qaeda, made his first of many appearances. Gadahn was ridiculing -- in English, with Arabic sub-titles -- the American President and issuing dire warnings aimed at US audiences of the disasters that would befall America if the USA and her allies did not quit "Muslim lands".  Read more: Algeria crisis is a wakeup call for America  While Bin Laden was lionized by the young men around us, the star of each show was the brash, in-our-face (and happily defunct) Abou Musab al-Zarqawi, a Jordanian who was the former leader of the Iraqi franchise of Al Qaeda. Zarqawi had walked their talk regarding cleansing "Muslim lands" of the presence of infidels with passion, utter ruthlessness and without compromise. He was their man of action. He did, in their view, what others merely talked and fantasized about. The scene the young ones loved best on what we came to call "TV Night", was Zarqawi standing, legs planted wide, with a fierce and vicious open-mouthed grin on his face, firing the entire 100 round magazine of a SAW (a Belgian light machinegun), just past the camera with the sound jacked way up. We could almost hear his scream of whatever the Arabic equivalent is of "GET SOME!"  Read more: Algeria hostage crisis may be future of terrorism  Each time an episode of mayhem and destruction would occur on the screen, the crowd pressing around Louis and me would shout, "Allahu Akbar" and immediately swivel their eyes to watch how we were enjoying the show. Without my glasses, I could read none of the signs or sub-titles, so Louis would read them out loud until I quietly asked him to stop. The video did not need a great deal of interpretation.  Obviously, these propaganda videos were intended to pump up the boys, to remind them that they were part of a large global cause in which sacrifice was a major element. And it was having the desired impact; particularly for the younger mujahideen whose eyes glistened with excitement as they watched the Western infidels being butchered and humiliated over and over again. The senior members of the Group were less caught up in the show and the laptop operator was choosing the clips to be displayed with some care. I could only imagine what he was skipping and I did not for a moment presume that they were being avoided out of generosity but rather cold, hard pragmatism. They did not want to break their hostages, at least, not yet.  In many ways, both for the assembled Belmokhtar Group of AQIM, and for me, the scenes that elicited the strongest emotion were the all-too-familiar images of black-hooded, orange-clad figures, chained hand and foot, shuffling around those tiny cages in Guantanamo. These were indignities perpetrated by my side -- the 'good guys'. Those scenes of German Shepherds, fangs bared, straining to get at broken men cowering in corners and those piles of horrified naked bodies forced into obscene intimacy and, always, the iconic black-hooded figure, mutely perched barefoot on a box in a short black poncho with wires dangling from his outstretched fingers in the disgraceful Abu Ghraib prison in Baghdad, made me, in the midst of my own mental anguish, feel deep shame.  The leaden and menacing stares of our Al Qaeda captors eloquently made a mockery of our aggressive Western claims to harbour higher or superior values. The look on their faces declared that we had abandoned any alleged moral high-ground, which they, at least for the moment, sought to occupy with regard to their treatment of Louis and me, if only to demonstrate to themselves their own moral superiority.  It is therefore at least paradoxical that those wretched videotapes and photos of Guantanamo and Abu Ghraib may have resulted in Louis' and my captivity being less violent than it otherwise might have been, for it seemed to me that we were spared worse treatment because our abductors were anxious to demonstrate that they didn't stoop to such stuff, which, of course, we know is not generally the case. That particular myth, however, with that particular Group of AQIM hostage-takers, probably served us well.  Thus, I found that the most appalling of those TV Night videos images were not the mass murders and individual assassinations perpetrated by Al Qaeda and their allies against our soldiers and civilians, which were never easy to behold, but less difficult to understand. That was simply Al Qaeda being Al Qaeda. That was what they were. Rather, it was the intimate and almost palpable proof of our side's methodically applied, officially sanctioned, and so casually administered barbarity, that had been parsed into the bureaucratic banalities and legal niceties of officially sanctioned abuse and torture which was so hard to absorb. Viewing such scenes, I could not help but believe that if we were capable of such outrages and so carelessly willing to resort to torture-as-entertainment, then we had indeed strayed into truly dangerous ethical territory.  The ease with which faux-legal language was coined in Washington and unopposed throughout the West in a cursory attempt to legitimize the illegitimate; the arbitrary manner in which long-standing international conventions were set aside; and the glibness with which word-games and were employed to condone such practices, should have stunned us all. The methodical development of "black sites" and concepts like "extraordinary rendition" (sub-contracting torture) and "enhanced interrogation"; the invention of ersatz juridical explanations of why was not torture, and other such despicable behaviour, indeed made a mockery of our Western pretensions to be champions of human rights and international justice. Further, without a shred of doubt, they have massively increased recruitment to the Islamist cause and markedly amplified the threat against Western interests and the security of individual Americans and their friends and allies.  If the dreadful events of 11 September 2001 could so easily dismantle the bulwarks of free, just and open societies which had taken us centuries to build, then, yes, our claims to a higher moral standard were in fact a sham, and surely there were no effective limits to what we were prepared to visit upon our enemies, or merely anybody who got in our way.  No, these were not made-in-Canada practices, justifications and facilities, but how easily we in our country and our friends throughout Europe abandoned our much-vaunted principles and meekly, often enthusiastically, went along. The bulk of our usually vocal human rights advocates and politicians were muted or stunned into silence when the need to avenge the insult and atrocity of 9/11 was allowed to pervert the law and sully the reputation of our friends and neighbours; perversions which have done and continue to do the West incalculable harm throughout the world. We are clearly guilty by such association. And Louis and I were reaping the consequences.  The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of Robert R. Fowler.
In February 2012, federal officials and attorneys general from 49 states announced a $25 billion settlement with five of the nation's largest banks over robo-signing and other wrongful foreclosure practices. As part of the agreement, the banks agreed to reform their business practices related to loan servicing and foreclosures.  New York Attorney General Eric Schneiderman alleged Monday that Bank of America and Wells Fargo have repeatedly violated this agreement, claiming to have documented 339 cases involving various homeowners. His planned lawsuits mark the first legal actions from federal or state officials over banks' alleged non-compliance with the settlement.  "The five mortgage services that signed the National Mortgage Settlement are legally required to take specific, rigorous and enforceable steps to protect homeowners," Schneiderman said in a statement. "Wells Fargo and Bank of America have flagrantly violated those obligations, putting hundreds of homeowners across New York at greater risk of foreclosure."  Bank of America ( Fortune 500) said in a statement that it had "provided relief for more than 10,000 New York homeowners through the National Mortgage Settlement, totaling more than $1 billion."  "Attorney General Schneiderman has referenced 129 customer servicing problems which we take seriously and will work quickly to address," the bank said.  Under last year's settlement, the five banks -- BofA, Wells Fargo, JPMorgan ( Fortune 500), Citi ( Fortune 500) and Ally -- agreed to pay $5 billion to the states and the federal government, with the rest coming in the form of non-cash relief for homeowners like refinancing and principal reduction.  The banks also agreed to implement a package of standards for the handling of homeowners seeking loan modifications.  Schneiderman said BofA and Wells Fargo violated the standards by not acknowledging modification applications within the specified time frame, failing to notify borrowers about deficiencies in their applications in timely fashion, not giving borrowers the allotted 30 days to correct their applications, and failing to make decisions about modifications within 30 days.  "Violations of the timeline standards increase the likelihood that distressed homeowners will lose their homes," the statement from Schneiderman said. "Additional fees, penalties and interest accrue during periods of delay, making a modification more difficult and pushing homeowners closer to the brink of foreclosure."
Is the crisis affecting you? Send us your experiences.  Yeonpyeong Island, South Korea (CNN) -- The Obama administration on Wednesday slammed North Korea's pugnacious rants toward South Korea and the West and a U.S. intelligence official called the strident remarks worrisome.  "The ratcheting up of rhetoric is of concern to us," the official said.  The question is whether this is "just rhetoric," he said. Or, "are things happening behind the scenes indicating the blustering has something to it."  Another U.S. official said there is a lot of uncertainty about North Korea's intentions.  "North Korea is not a paper tiger so it wouldn't be smart to dismiss its provocative behavior as pure bluster," that official said.  U.S. says it sent B-2 stealth bombers over South Korea  "What's not clear right now is how much risk (North Korean leader) Kim Jong Un is willing to run, to show the world and domestic elites that he's a tough guy. His inexperience is certain -- his wisdom is still very much in question."  North Korea earlier said it was cutting off a key military hotline with South Korea amid high tensions between the two sides.  "Under the situation where a war may break out any moment, there is no need to keep north-south military communications," the head of a North Korean delegation told the South by telephone Wednesday, according to the North's state-run Korean Central News Agency.  There are several hotlines between North and South Korea. Earlier this month, Pyongyang disconnected a Red Cross hotline that ran through the border village of Panmunjom and was used by officials on both sides, according to the South Korean Unification Ministry.  And senior U.S. officials do not believe the cutting off of some communication by North Korea in itself is indicative of more dramatic action or is conclusive. The officials note that North Korea has cut these links before, some of them multiple times.  "It's part of the current threat-of-the-day pattern. I wouldn't extrapolate it to anything more conclusive," one official said.  "They want attention and they want to scare people both inside and outside their country."  Officials see steps such as cutting off communication are more substitutes for doing other more dangerous things rather than precursors to more dangerous things.  "That is certainly our fervent hope," the official said.  At the same time, there is concern about a North Korean miscalculation during this time. The officials said the lack of communication could complicate and hamper the ability of all nations involved (including North Korea, South Korea and the United States) to control and moderate any action -- and cycle of reaction should one begin as the result of a North Korean miscalculation.  The North linked its move to annual joint military exercises by South Korea and the United States, which it has cited in a string of threats against the two countries in recent weeks. Tougher sanctions approved by the U.N. Security Council also may have fueled its anger.  "It is important the U.S. send a message. In terms of the military side, the U.S. has clearly sent a message," the intelligence official said. "When people engage in this sort of rhetoric, you can't appear as if you are not responding," the official said.  The intelligence community has been providing the Obama administration with assessments of Kim Jung Un's control of the regime, but the official would not provide any details of that assessment.  Administration officials also regretted the tough talk from Pyongyang. State Department spokesman Patrick Ventrell cited "more bellicose rhetoric and threats (that) follow a pattern designed to raise tensions and intimidate others."  Josh Earnest, White House principal deputy press secretary, said the United States is committed to ensuring the security of its allies, such as South Korea.  "The North Koreans are not going to achieve anything through these threats and provocations. They're only going to further isolate the North Koreans and undermine international efforts to bring peace and stability to northeast Asia," Earnest said.  Pentagon spokesman George Little spoke on the government's nuclear threats to the United States and "its more achievable threats to attack South Korean military units and shell border islands."  "We take their rhetoric seriously, whether it's outside the norm which it sometimes is, or seems to suggest a more direct threat. And if you look at what they've said recently, it's been extremely provocative, threatening and bellicose. And it's a complete mystery to me why they would deem it in their own interest to launch this type of rhetoric at us and our allies," Little said.  The North's announcement Wednesday appeared likely to affect the movement of people in and out of the Kaesong Industrial Complex, a joint economic cooperation zone between the two Koreas situated on the North's side of the border.  "The measure taken by North Korea is not beneficial for the stable operation of the Kaesong Industrial Complex, and we urge them to withdraw the measure," the Unification Ministry said.  On Thursday morning, the day after the North said it was severing the line, South Korean workers were able to cross the border and enter the industrial zone, the semiofficial South Korean news agency Yonhap reported, citing the Immigration and Quarantine office in Paju, near the border.  An initial group of 197 workers went over the border at 8:30 a.m. local time (7:30 p.m. Wednesday ET) after North Korea gave the regular approval for their movement by phone through the industrial district's management committee, Yonhap said.  A total of 530 South Koreans were due to enter the Kaesong complex on Thursday, and 511 are scheduled to come back into South Korea, according to Yonhap.  North Korea's threats: Five things to know  A symbol of North-South cooperation, the Kaesong complex is also seen as an important source of hard currency for the regime in Pyongyang.  The North previously cut off the Kaesong military hotline in March 2009 -- also during annual U.S.-South Korean military exercises -- but later reinstated it, according to Yonhap.  The slew of recent fiery rhetoric from Pyongyang has included threats of pre-emptive nuclear strikes against the United States and South Korea, as well as the declaration that the armistice that stopped the Korean War in 1953 is no longer valid.  Behind the veil: A rare look at life in North Korea  On Tuesday, the North said it planned to place military units tasked with targeting U.S. bases under combat-ready status.  Most observers say North Korea is still years away from having the technology to deliver a nuclear warhead on a missile, but it does have plenty of conventional military firepower, including medium-range ballistic missiles that can carry high explosives for hundreds of miles.  The heightened tensions on the Korean Peninsula came after the North carried out a long-range rocket launch in December and an underground nuclear test last month, prompting the U.N. Security Council to step up sanctions on the secretive regime.  CNN's K.J. Kwon reported from Yeonpyeong Island, CNN's Pam Benson and Elise Labott reported from Washington.Jethro Mullen reported and wrote from Hong Kong. CNN's Joe Sterling contributed to this report.
(CNN) -- The media circus that is Jodi Arias' murder trial is in its final stretch, as the jury began deliberations Friday following closing arguments. The jury, which has been in court since January, will resume deliberations Monday.  It's been an R-rated story, to say the least, with an abundance of testimony about grisly violence and, from Arias, details about a kinky sex life she says she shared with Alexander.  The case has captured massive if not total interest among Americans. While one part of the country watches CNN's sister network HLN for every twist in the trial, or drives hours to get one of the courtroom's limited lottery seats (yes, they're doled out via lottery), another segment of the nation asks, "Jodi who?"  For those of you in the latter category, here are some things you should know as the trial comes to a close:  Lost in the salacious details of the "Jodi Arias trial" is the victim, Travis Alexander, 30, who was brutally killed in his Mesa, Arizona, home in June 2008.  Faith was an integral part of Alexander's life. The professed son of methamphetamine addicts, Alexander was raised in Riverside, California, with three brothers and four sisters. His grandmother introduced him to Mormonism as a child.  After he graduated from high school he went on a two-year mission in Denver. He later moved to Mesa because of the strong Mormon community and became a motivational speaker and businessman. He also authored a book titled, "Raising You."  Arias was living in Yreka, California, when she met Alexander at a business convention in Las Vegas in September 2006. That November, he baptized Arias into the Mormon faith, a ceremony Arias said was followed by anal sex.  Arias became his girlfriend two months later, she testified. They broke up in the summer of 2007, and Alexander began dating other women.  There were claims that Arias would stalk him, peering in his windows at times. Still, he and Arias continued to hang out on several occasions until -- disenchanted Arias says -- she moved back to Northern California. They continued to communicate.  Alexander's naked body was found crammed in a stand-up shower after he missed two appointments, prompting friends to go to his house. He had been stabbed 27 times in the back and torso and shot in the head. His throat was slit from ear to ear.  Arias initially told an investigator, "I heard a lot of rumors, and that there was a lot of blood." She later claimed she killed him, albeit in self-defense.  Deputy Maricopa County Attorney Juan Martinez has accused Arias of playing the victim when, in fact, he alleges she staged the crime scene to make it look like self-defense and has actively sought to profit from the media attention.  Prior to Alexander's killing, Martinez said, Arias stole her grandparents' .25-caliber pistol, rented a car in Redding, California, turned off her cell phone and brought along cans of gas so there would be no record that she was in Arizona.  "The only reason to keep this whole thing a secret, which is what she tried to do, is because she was going to kill him, and she's making preparations," the prosecutor said.  Finally, according to Martinez's closing argument, after she killed Alexander, she hooked up with an out-of-state romantic interest so she would have an alibi.  "She continues on to Utah into his waiting arms. Gosh, you can almost hear the violins making their sound as she goes up to him, gives him that first kiss. Isn't that romantic?" Martinez said.  Defense attorney Jennifer Willmott has said Arias was the victim of a controlling, psychologically abusive relationship and that Alexander considered Arias "his dirty little secret."  Before Arias killed her ex in self-defense, Willmott claimed, she was subjected to rough vaginal sex. After she dropped Alexander's new camera, he became violent, the defense said, and had Arias not defended herself, investigators would've found Arias, not Alexander, dead in the bathroom.  Arguing the prosecution's position that Arias was obsessed with Alexander and stalking him, another defense attorney, Kirk Nurmi, has said it didn't add up because Arias was active on a Mormon dating site.  "Jodi ... wasn't so locked in on Travis that she wasn't looking for other men," Nurmi said.  As for the allegation that Arias attempted to surreptitiously slip in and out of Arizona without a trace, Nurmi pointed out that Arias went to the Redding, California, airport to rent her car for the trip.  "An airport with security cameras and security all around," the defense attorney said, "not some rental car agency on the outskirts of town -- an airport. That doesn't make any sense if you're on a covert mission."  Nurmi also questioned the merit of the prosecution's gas can argument, saying Arias could have avoided a paper trail simply by paying with cash. She didn't need cans, he said.  Did Arias change her story? Sure, Nurmi said, but that's not what she's standing trial for.  "If Jodi Arias were accused of the crime of lying, I could not stand before you and say she's not guilty of that crime, but nowhere in your jury instructions are you asked to convict Jodi Arias of lying," Nurmi said.  If you didn't realize before, you probably see now why the case has drawn a cult following of sorts. It's rife with sex, lies and digital images, many of them naughty, and the dueling attorneys are lively -- nay, bombastic -- in their arguments.  Arias herself has been tweeting from jail -- through a proxy, of course -- criticizing HLN and Martinez, and directing followers to a website that sells art on her behalf.  For some media outlets, the case is gold.  HLN has created a show, "After Dark: The Jodi Arias Trial," which invites an in-studio and at-home audience to grade the day's arguments. Its website is flush with every facet of the case, including a photo gallery containing 180 evidence photos.  The Huffington Post has similar coverage, and CNN affiliates KPHO and KNXV in Phoenix have special trial pages on their websites.  Before you lob cries of a sensationalist media profiting off a gruesome death, realize that people are clamoring for the coverage. HLN has enjoyed a ratings boost since the trial began, and people drive hours to see the trial for themselves.  Spectators began lining up Friday at 1 a.m. -- more than six hours before the courthouse opened -- to get a seat, according to KPHO.  Until April 25, the public was given access on a first-come-first-served basis, but the judge changed it to a lottery system for closing arguments, the station reported.  Everardo McFarlane of Phoenix was none too happy with the change, as he was first in line Friday but didn't make the cut.  "I just hope justice is served and that at least we get our $1.6 million worth with a conviction," McFarlane told KPHO, referring to the ever-increasing taxpayer expense on the trial.  R.D. Williams of Amarillo, Texas, didn't have the luxury of a short drive across town.  "It's 10 hours nonstop, two times to fuel up. I didn't bring no extra gas cans," Williams said, making a joke about a key argument in the case.  What could happen to Arias is anyone's guess.  If the jury's hung, she could face a retrial.  The prosecution, naturally, would like to see a first-degree murder conviction, as its case has revolved around Arias premeditating the killing. If convicted on this charge, Arias will face a mini-trial of sorts to determine if she killed Alexander cruelly and knew he would suffer.  A first-degree murder conviction could mean execution unless a jury grants her leniency, in which case she would get life in prison and may not be eligible for parole for at least 25 years.  If the prosecution can't prove premeditation, Arias could still be convicted of second-degree murder, commanding 10 to 22 years in prison. The jury can also decide that Arias killed Alexander recklessly or that he attacked her. She'd then be convicted of manslaughter.  Lastly, the jury could find her not guilty or determine that she acted in self-defense and that her actions were reasonable. Either way, she'd then be free to pursue her dream of becoming a professional photographer, and the media circus could move to another town.
Following a decade in which prices fell to all-time lows, premiums for new term policies last year rose an average of 3%, says online agency IntelliQuote, which forecasts more increases this year.  The culprit? Sickly yields on bonds, in which insurers invest most of customers' premiums.  Hit hardest are policies longer than the standard 20-year term; top firms Genworth and ING have stopped selling 30-year term, and rates are up about 5% among remaining carriers, says Byron Udell of term life agency AccuQuote.  Despite the general increase, premiums can vary widely. To nab a low-priced policy, start your search online with either IntelliQuote or AccuQuote.  Stick with insurers rated A or better for financial strength by A.M. Best. And should you want coverage beyond your guaranteed term, screen for policies giving you until age 60 to convert to permanent insurance without a physical -- a big plus if health changes make you uninsurable.
In the flood of words written recently about women and work, one related and hugely significant point seems to me to have been neglected. It has to do with America's future, about which -- here's a familiar opinion from me -- I'm an unqualified optimist. Now entertain another opinion of mine: Women are a major reason we will do so well.  Start with the fact that our country's progress since 1776 has been mind-blowing, like nothing the world has ever seen. Our secret sauce has been a political and economic system that unleashes human potential to an extraordinary degree. As a result Americans today enjoy an abundance of goods and services that no one could have dreamed of just a few centuries ago.  But that's not the half of it -- or, rather, it's just about the half of it. America has forged this success while utilizing, in large part, only half of the country's talent. For most of our history, women -- whatever their abilities -- have been relegated to the sidelines. Only in recent years have we begun to correct that problem.  Despite the inspiring "all men are created equal" assertion in the Declaration of Independence, male supremacy quickly became enshrined in the Constitution. In Article II, dealing with the presidency, the 39 delegates who signed the document -- all men, naturally -- repeatedly used male pronouns. In poker, they call that a "tell."  Finally, 133 years later, in 1920, the U.S. softened its discrimination against women via the 19th Amendment, which gave them the right to vote. But that law scarcely budged attitudes and behaviors. In its wake, 33 men rose to the Supreme Court before Sandra Day O'Connor made the grade -- 61 years after the amendment was ratified. For those of you who like numbers, the odds against that procession of males occurring by chance are more than 8 billion to one.  Watch an interview with Warren Buffett on women, work, and other wisdom  When people questioned the absence of female appointees, the standard reply over those 61 years was simply "no qualified candidates." The electorate took a similar stance. When my dad was elected to Congress in 1942, only eight of his 434 colleagues were women. One lonely woman, Maine's Margaret Chase Smith, sat in the Senate.  Resistance among the powerful is natural when change clashes with their self-interest. Business, politics, and, yes, religions provide many examples of such defensive behavior. After all, who wants to double the number of competitors for top positions?  But an even greater enemy of change may well be the ingrained attitudes of those who simply can't imagine a world different from the one they've lived in. What happened in my own family provides an example. I have two sisters. The three of us were regarded, by our parents and teachers alike, as having roughly equal intelligence -- and IQ tests in fact confirmed our equality. For a long time, to boot, my sisters had far greater "social" IQ than I. (No, we weren't tested for that -- but, believe me, the evidence was overwhelming.)  The moment I emerged from my mother's womb, however, my possibilities dwarfed those of my siblings, for I was a boy! And my brainy, personable, and good-looking siblings were not. My parents would love us equally, and our teachers would give us similar grades. But at every turn my sisters would be told -- more through signals than words -- that success for them would be "marrying well." I was meanwhile hearing that the world's opportunities were there for me to seize.  So my floor became my sisters' ceiling -- and nobody thought much about ripping up that pattern until a few decades ago. Now, thank heavens, the structural barriers for women are falling.  MORE: How Gen-Y women can close the pay gap  Still an obstacle remains: Too many women continue to impose limitations on themselves, talking themselves out of achieving their potential. Here, too, I have had some firsthand experience.  Among the scores of brilliant and interesting women I've known is the late Katharine Graham, long the controlling shareholder and CEO of the Washington Post Co. (  When her husband died, it was in the self-interest of some of the men around Kay to convince her that her feelings of inadequacy were justified. The pressures they put on her were torturing. Fortunately, Kay, in addition to being smart, had an inner strength. Calling on it, she managed to ignore the baritone voices urging her to turn over her heritage to them.  I met Kay in 1973 and quickly saw that she was a person of unusual ability and character. But the gender-related self-doubt was certainly there too. Her brain knew better, but she could never quite still the voice inside her that said, "Men know more about running a business than you ever will."  I told Kay that she had to discard the fun-house mirror that others had set before her and instead view herself in a mirror that reflected reality. "Then," I said, "you will see a woman who is a match for anyone, male or female."  I wish I could claim I was successful in that campaign. Proof was certainly on my side: Washington Post stock went up more than 4,000% -- that's 40 for 1 -- during Kay's 18 years as boss. After retiring, she won a Pulitzer Prize for her superb autobiography. But her self-doubt remained, a testament to how deeply a message of unworthiness can be implanted in even a brilliant mind.  MORE: Warren Buffett may be souring on stocks  I'm happy to say that funhouse mirrors are becoming less common among the women I meet. Try putting one in front of my daughter. She'll just laugh and smash it. Women should never forget that it is common for powerful and seemingly self-assured males to have more than a bit of the Wizard of Oz in them. Pull the curtain aside, and you'll often discover they are not supermen after all. (Just ask their wives!)  So, my fellow males, what's in this for us? Why should we care whether the remaining barriers facing women are dismantled and the fun-house mirrors junked? Never mind that I believe the ethical case in itself is compelling. Let's look instead to your self-interest.  No manager operates his or her plants at 80% efficiency when steps could be taken that would increase output. And no CEO wants male employees to be underutilized when improved training or working conditions would boost productivity. So take it one step further: If obvious benefits flow from helping the male component of the workforce achieve its potential, why in the world wouldn't you want to include its counterpart?  Fellow males, get onboard. The closer that America comes to fully employing the talents of all its citizens, the greater its output of goods and services will be. We've seen what can be accomplished when we use 50% of our human capacity. If you visualize what 100% can do, you'll join me as an unbridled optimist about America's future.  This story is from the May 20, 2013 issue of Fortune.
(CNN) -- A Dubai-based perfume, cosmetics and jewelry chain is set to become one of the first international luxury retailers to open its doors in previously war-torn areas of Iraq.  Paris Gallery, known across the Gulf for its opulent premises piled high with glass cabinets of designer watches, perfumes, and other mainly European luxury goods, has unveiled plans to open at least five stores across major cities in Iraq -- including Baghdad and Basra -- over the next three years.  With the first shop due to begin trading in the first half of 2013, Paris Gallery CEO Mohamed A. R. Al Fahim says that now is the time to invest in Iraq's domestic market.  "We've been waiting for years for the right conditions," he said. "We've done extensive assessments and believe that now the country is really moving away from what it was to what it wants to be ... there is great potential."  The IMF estimates that between 2009 and 2012, GDP per-capita based on current prices in Iraq more than doubled, and Paris Gallery is hedging its bets on the growth of a previously stagnant consumer culture and Iraqis with more disposable income.  "When companies like ours move into places like Iraq, it tells the people something which is: 'Look guys, you deserve it -- you deserve to feel better about yourself, you deserve to have some of the best products from around the world at your doorstep,'" Fahim said. "It's a confidence boost for the people."  Sura Alrawi is an accountant earning $19,000 a year -- over four times the national average based on IMF figures. She has lived and worked in Baghdad her whole life and welcomes the prospect of being able to purchase branded cosmetics and perfumes locally.  The price of bottle of perfume starts at $50 dollars and many cosmetics brands familiar in the West will be easily available for the first time.  "I'm an Iraqi woman who can afford and wants to buy the kind of things that very few shops here sell," she said.  Now 23, Alrawi was just a young girl before the 2003 U.S.-led war in Iraq that toppled Saddam Hussein, but she still recalls that the most basic international brands were then prohibitively difficult to buy.  "Our borders with Iran and Kuwait were blocked and there was an international economic blockade, so I remember it was very expensive to buy anything fancy," she said.  Even now, Alrawi -- who lives at home with her parents -- says that imports are inconvenient and import duties costly. As such, she and her friends are looking forward to the sheer convenience of stores like the Paris Gallery opening in their city.  "Yes there is still a lot of variation in incomes here, and of course I don't believe that these kind of products will immediately be affordable to everyone. But after years of having so little, there is now definitely a feeling of great demand," she said.  Continued sectarian violence, like the car bombings that killed at least 13 people in northwestern Baghdad over the weekend, as well as stalling government infrastructure programs, mean that a flourishing mainstream consumer culture is still some way off, according to William Watts, director of operations at Dunia Frontier Consultants.  "Iraq is sitting on one of the world's largest oil reserves, so there's no question it has enormous economic potential," Watts said. "However, as things stand the infrastructure is not where it needs to be."  Iraq is still struggling just to transport oil from its vast oil fields to the shipping tankers that export it to the rest of world, according to Watts.  "It all comes back to oil ... Revenue from oil constitutes around 96% of Iraq's budget, so the more money they can make from that, the more they can then spend on building roads, reliable electricity supplies and security," he said. "These are the building blocks that make for a stable and attractive business environment."  Watts say that Iraq nonetheless has a historic reputation as a good place to do business, the culture of which still remains.  "Despite the last 35 years of instability, Iraqis retain their entrepreneurial instinct. They're great at making deals, diversifying their interests, working hard and solving problems," he said.  On the other hand, Watts points out that the legacy of the Saddam era is a heaving, highly bureaucratic state, which makes conducting business slow and difficult.  "I've heard of companies who have had equipment held up in customs for eight months," he said. "And getting routine work visas can be a nightmare."  Al Fahim, however, is undeterred. He explains that Paris Gallery has teamed up with the Al Handle Group, an Iraqi firm established in 1975 that he says understand the local business environment and will run the stores on a franchise basis.  "There are always problems setting up a businesses in a new country, no matter how developed it is. But there are no difficulties we can see that can't be solved," said Al Fahim.  "Once we've shown everyone that it can be done then I would love nothing more than to see other international firms who specialize in shopping and entertainment, moving in and helping make Iraq a happier place to live."
Mainsail is CNN's monthly sailing show, exploring the sport of sailing, luxury travel and the latest in design and technology.  London (CNN) -- Art exhibitions don't usually float on water but the CNM Estates Fine Art Sails regatta, which debuted this weekend on London's River Thames, is no ordinary expose of contemporary culture.  Part fine-art show, part boat-race, the three-day event saw 10 sailboats -- skippered by a host of Olympic and World Championship sailors -- take to the water bearing sails adorned with the work of some of Britain's foremost modern artists.  Monochrome prints of giant facial features, manic flocks of imposing seagulls and a menacing child with tribal war-paints comprised just a few of the surreal and arresting works on show during a snow-blanketed weekend in the UK capital.  Organizers say the concept marks a first of its kind collaboration between art and top-class sailing and could soon be casting off at famous waterside locations around the world.  See also: Inside the mind of a yachting cartoonist  "This is the first time anyone has really tried to do this and the reaction has been quite amazing," said the founder of Fine Art Sails, Michael Ross.  "There is already interest in staging an event on the [Moskva] River in view of the Kremlin," he said, adding the possibility of others in San Francisco, Miami and on the Caspian Sea.  Artists who contributed works to the riverside event -- which formed part of the week-long London Boat Show -- include the fashion duo Mark Eley and Wakako Kishimoto, portrait artist Christian Furr, as well as musician and actor, Goldie.  As Fine Art Sails moves on to other locations, Ross hopes creatives of all disciplines and nationalities will be inspired to add their handiwork to the project.  "It's a totally new way for artists to display their work," he explained. "This event has given those involved the opportunity to try new things, display their art in a very public place and access to an audience they otherwise might not reach."  Ross also makes a point of highlighting the artistic difficulties encountered in this new mode of exhibition.  See also: World's unluckiest boat bows out  Racing sails are generally made from Dacron, an ultra-lightweight cloth that differs greatly from some of the more the conventional materials artists use, such as canvas.  The manner in which sails are designed to capture wind meanwhile ensures that any design, painting or print is constantly moving and changing shape when on the water, altering the appearance of the artwork in the process.  According to British sculptor, David Begbie, who donated a print for the regatta entitled "An Eye for the Buoys," tackling these unorthodox requirements was an enjoyable part of the creative process.  "The sails are a very rich concept for artists to work with and it has culminated in something of pretty majestic proportions," Begbie said.  "It's a versatile and adaptable format [which] when you think about it is basically a new kind of art form.  "Most artists work in a rectangular format but this creates a totally new shape," he added.  Begbie's enthusiasm is shared by competing sailor and British Olympic gold medalist, Pippa Wilson.  While unsure about the extent to which artistic sails can integrate into sailing at the very highest level -- where sails have to be as light as possible -- Wilson believes they can be a valuable asset in garnering the attention of a non-traditional sailing audience.  "This is something that has never been done before and hopefully it will add a little bit of culture to our sport," Said Wilson before taking to the water.  "I've been so lucky to be involved in sailing since a young age and know how wonderful it can be, so if an event like this can grab people's attention and get them involved then it will definitely have been worthwhile," she added.
Boston (CNN) -- One of three friends accused of helping Boston Marathon bombing suspect Dzhokhar Tsarnaev cover up his alleged crime got out on bond Monday, released to his mother's custody.  Robel Phillipos left the federal courthouse in a red Toyota sedan after a judge set bail at $100,000. He will stay at his mother's home, where he was living before his arrest last week, and be monitored electronically, according to terms his lawyers and prosecutors agreed to before Monday's hearing.  "I'm certainly happy for his mother and his family," family friend Michelle Borden told reporters outside the courthouse. "Now he has the comfort and the guidance he needs."  The courtroom was filled with friends and relatives during the Monday's hearing, during which Phillipos appeared in jail coveralls and handcuffs.  "Now we look forward to defending him in the coming months," defense lawyer Derege Demissie said. "We are confident in the end he will be able to clear his name."  Read: Who are the three friends?  The FBI says that on April 18, the three friends -- Phillipos, Azamat Tazhayakov and Dias Kadyrbayev -- went to Tsarnaev's dorm room at the University of Massachusetts-Dartmouth. According to court documents, Tazhayakov and Kadyrbayev removed items from the room, including a laptop and a backpack loaded with fireworks, while Phillipos made false statements to bombing investigators.  Phillipos is a U.S. citizen and a Boston native. Kadyrbayev and Tazhayakov are from Kazakhstan and had visas to study in the United States.  "At no time did Robel have any prior knowledge of this marathon bombing, nor did he participate in the planning done by the defendant in this case," Phillipos co-counsel Susan Church said. "He is not charged with, nor is he alleged to have disposed with, the backpack, or had any role in what the two other students who are here on visas did with the backpack."  Here are the latest developments in the cases:  Phillipos was a "frightened and confused 19-year-old" when authorities questioned him several times in the days that followed the April 15 bombing, which killed three people and wounded more than 260. Police believe Tsarnaev and his older brother, Tamerlan Tsarnaev, set off the two bombs near the race's finish line.  Phillipos was under tremendous pressure when he was interrogated and didn't have an attorney at the time to help him, according to his attorneys. In asking for bail, attorneys said their client's future has been ruined by the arrest.  "He will suffer its enduring and devastating effect for the rest of his life. The only way he can salvage his future is by clearing his name," the documents say.  Phillipos faces up to eight years in prison and a $250,000 fine if convicted. The judge Monday warned Phillipos not to tamper with witnesses on the threat of being locked up again.  He attended high school with the younger Tsarnaev at Cambridge Rindge and Latin School in Cambridge, Massachusetts, where they both live.  According to the court document, Phillipos hadn't seen or talked to Dzhokhar Tsarnaev for at least two months before the bombing. He was taking a semester off from UMass-Dartmouth and was only on campus the night of April 18 for a seminar.  The document says Phillipos' presence on campus that night is a case of "sheer coincidence and bad luck."  Phillipos was living with his mother, an Ethiopian who immigrated to the United States in the 1980s and is now employed as a social worker.  "Everyone knows Robel as being a compassionate, thoughtful and sociable person," his mother, Genet Bekele, said in an affidavit.  Previously, a friend described Phillipos as a good kid who took care of his mom.  James Turney told CNN affiliate WBZ: "Phillipos plays basketball and doesn't have any anti-American thing about him."  Tazhayakov's father, Amir Ismagulov, told CNN he met with his son for about 40 minutes last week. Both father and son believe in the U.S. justice system, Ismagulov said.  The government will get to the bottom of what happened and let Tazhayakov go, said the father, speaking in Russian. He was in the "wrong place, (at the) wrong time, with (the) wrong people," his father said.  Tazhayakov is due back in court May 14. He was already in federal custody on immigration charges related to his student visa, having been arrested in the days after the bombings due to his friendship with Tsarnaev.  The Kazakhstan native is charged with obstruction of justice. If found guilty, he could face up to five years in prison and $250,000 in fines.  He is being represented by Arkady Bukh, an attorney based in New York.  Ismagulov said his son always admired and wanted to come to the United States. He was here to study engineering and work in the oil business, his father said.  Teenagers sometimes do stupid things, said Ismagulov, stressing that his son didn't know he was doing anything wrong.  Ismagulov said that he asked his son whether he had wanted to help Tsarnaev.  He apparently told his father no, saying that if they had wanted to help Tsarnaev, he and Kadyrbayev would have thrown out the bombing suspect's laptop and buried his backpack in the ground.  Investigators found the backpack, loaded with fireworks, in a landfill after a two-day search.  Tsarnaev's laptop was turned over by Kadyrbayev on April 19, the same day the FBI raided the apartment he shared with Tazhayakov, Kadyrbayev's attorney Robert Stahl said.  According to the University of Massachusetts-Dartmouth, Tazhayakov is enrolled but has been suspended pending the outcome of the case.  Kadyrbayev also remains in jail, awaiting a May 14 court date.  According to an FBI affidavit, Kadyrbayev had seen pictures of the suspects released by the FBI on April 18 and texted Dzhokhar Tsarnaev to tell him "he looked like the suspect on television." Tsarnaev texted back "lol" and added, "come to my room and take whatever you want."'  Attorney Stahl also said his client "did not have anything to do" with the bombings and disputed that he tried to block the investigation.  Kadyrbayev, a Kazakh national, was taken into custody along with Tazhayakov on April 20 on suspicion that he had violated the terms of his student visa, Stahl said.  According to an interview his father gave in April, Kadyrbayev, 19, "missed a couple, or maybe several classes."  "I can say about my son that he finished school with excellent grades; he was good at math. He helped others. When he saw that help was needed, he always accommodated," Murat Kadyrbayev told Tengi News and STV channel in Kazakhstan.  Kadyrbayev is not currently enrolled at the University of Massachusetts-Dartmouth.  He is charged with obstruction of justice and could face up to five years in prison and $250,000 in fines if found guilty.  Kazakhstan's foreign ministry said it was offering consular services to both Kadyrbayev and Tazhayakov. "We would like to emphasize that our citizens did not receive charges of involvement in the organization of the Boston Marathon bombings. They were charged with destroying evidence," the ministry said in a statement.  CNN's Susan Candiotti reported from Boston; Steve Almasy reported and wrote from Atlanta. CNN's Carol Cratty, Joe Johns, Dana Ford, Chris Welch and Julia Talanova also contributed to this report.
(CNN) -- There may not be a single cemetery in Massachusetts or in the entire country that is willing to be Tamerlan Tsarnaev's final resting place, a funeral director told CNN on Monday.  And that has left Peter Stefan in a very difficult spot.  "I think (the cemeteries that have been asked) probably fear reprisals from people who have loved ones being buried there, people who may potentially buy lots there," the funeral director said.  Tsarnaev and his younger brother, Dzhokhar, are accused of setting off two deadly explosions at the Boston Marathon in April.  The funeral director says he is trying to do everything he can, but he's struggling.  "I think a lot of the people don't understand," Stefan said. "And it's an emotional problem, obviously."  But, "We have to bury this guy," he continued. "Whoever he is, in this country, we bury people."  But outside the funeral home in Worcester, about 40 miles west of downtown Boston, picketers denounced plans to bury the marathon bomb suspect in their community. One held a sign that read, "Bury the garbage in the landfill."  William Breault, chairman of a Worcester civic group, told CNN that Stefan "made a big mistake" agreeing to accept the remains, "and now we're in a situation where nobody wants to take him."  "I not only don't want to see him buried in Worcester, Massachusetts, very close to where I live, I don't think he should be buried in the state," Breault said. He said his organization, the Main South Alliance for Public Safety, is trying to raise up to $5,000 to have Tsarnaev's body shipped overseas.  "He's not a citizen, he shouldn't be given rights," Breault said.  Meanwhile on Monday, a law enforcement official who spoke to CNN said that investigators believe that Tsarnaev accessed Inspire magazine -- an English-language magazine published by al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula -- on a computer in the apartment where he and his wife lived.  The Inspire material had instructions on bomb-making, the official said. Asked whether the computer belonged to the husband, his wife, or whether it was shared, the official said only that investigators believe the husband was accessing that material.  What are the options?  It may be possible to look to the past for guidance on how to handle the remains of notorious figures.  Five new things in Boston bombing story  President John F. Kennedy's assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald, is buried in the Dallas area, where he lived before shooting Kennedy in 1963. Oklahoma City bomber Timothy McVeigh's ashes were scattered after his execution, though where is a mystery. The body of Abraham Lincoln's killer, John Wilkes Booth, lies in an unmarked grave in a Baltimore cemetery where other members of his family are buried.  Cremation is not an option because Islam does not allow it, according to Naeem Baig of the Islamic Circle of North America. However, it would not violate Islamic tradition to bury Tsarnaev in an unmarked grave, which may reduce the odds that a cemetery would suffer a backlash for providing space.  In fact, it's customary for Muslims to forgo gravestones, according to John Esposito, a professor of international affairs and Islamic studies at Georgetown University.  "That burial could be carried out by simply saying he was buried in a cemetery and burying him without a marker," Esposito said.  Some might ask why there hasn't been a move to bury Tsarnaev at sea, the way Osama bin Laden was buried. First, bin Laden's body was in the possession of the federal government, which isn't the case with Tsarnaev's body.  Secondly, as Baig points out, it wasn't a concern that relatives of bin Laden should be consulted. The United States asked Saudi Arabia if officials objected to burying bin Laden at sea. The Saudis did not.  In Tsarnaev's case, his parents are alive and in the Russian region of Dagestan. But Tamerlan Tsarnaev held a passport from the former Soviet republic of Kyrgyzstan, where he was born, so his remains can't be sent to Russia, said Zaurbek Sadakhanov, a lawyer for the parents.  Tsarnaev had requested a Russian passport but had not received one, Sadakhanov said. His parents have not asked that his body be brought to Russia -- and in any event, Russian law says the bodies of "terrorists" killed by government forces should be buried in an undisclosed location, without the family being notified of the site, he said.  Esposito said that although an unmarked grave may not violate Islamic practices, it could certainly run afoul of the courtesy of getting Tsarnaev's parents' permission to conduct their son's burial that way.  On Monday afternoon at a media event, Massachusetts Gov. Deval Patrick stressed that the fate of Tsarnaev's body rests with his family.  "First of all, this isn't a state or a federal issue. It's the family's issue," the governor said, responding to a reporter's question. "And the family has some options. I assume they will make a decision soon. I hope they do. I think everybody is feeling upset about what happened."  A reporter asked: "Do communities have a right to refuse the body?"  "I don't know about right," Patrick answered. "I think, if you're asking about legal rights and so forth, I don't know the answer to that. But I understand that the family does have some options, and I expect they will make a decision soon."  Asked if he opposed burying Tsarnaev in Massachusetts, Patrick said, "I don't have a comment about that or a point of view."  On Sunday, Tsarnaev's uncle Ruslan Tsarni was the only relative at Stefan's funeral home.  Tsarni, who decried the bombing suspects as "losers" after the attacks, performed the Islamic tradition of preparing a body for burial, washing and shrouding it.  He said he had not been in contact with Katherine Russell, his nephew's widow.  Read: What does the widow know?  "I'm left alone to deal with this matter," Tsarni said. "And I want to stress that Tamerlan Tsarnaev has no other place to be buried. There's no other place who would accept his body."  Tsarnaev's uncle wants him buried in Cambridge, Massachusetts, arguing that it's his nephew's home. "He grew up here," Tsarni said.  But town officials have strongly rejected the idea.  "The difficult and stressful efforts of the citizens of the City of Cambridge to return to a peaceful life would be adversely impacted by the turmoil, protests, and widespread media presence at such an interment," City Manager Robert W. Healy said in a statement Sunday.  Stefan suggested Monday that he and the family are considering appealing to a Muslim cemetery outside Massachusetts. And yet, that might not work either, he fears.  "I feel the same problem exists when the neighbors and the people find out what we're doing," Stefan said.  He added that most of the cemeteries in Massachusetts are nonsectarian with a section set aside for Muslims.  "The only true Muslim cemetery is in Connecticut," he said, without naming the cemetery he was referring to.  "At this point, any outcome would be better than nothing," Stefan said.  And he will continue to try to bring this painful experience -- for everyone -- to an end.  Stefan has said that if no grave site is found, he plans to ask the U.S. government to find one.  "This is a big problem, and somebody has to step in and say, 'Look, we're going to have to do something here,' " he said.  CNN's Susan Candiotti, Carol Cratty and Tim Lister contributed to this report.