The elephant in the room raised its trunk and blew about a half-hour into the only debate between former Governor Mark Sanford, a Republican, and Elizabeth Colbert Busch, the Democrat with whom he is vying for a vacant seat in Congress. Just how Mrs. Colbert Busch, a political neophyte in her first debate, would use Mr. Sanford's fictious hike along the Appalachian Trail as ammunition and how he would respond to lingering concerns over his public bout of marital infidelity while he was governor was the subject of much discussion before the debate. Mrs. Colbert Busch managed to turn questions about spending into a chance to raise the issue. Asked about the mandated federal spending cuts, Mrs. Colbert Busch took a dig at Mr. Sanford for spending state money on his affair. "When we talk about fiscal spending and we talk about protecting the taxpayers, it doesn't mean you take that money we saved and leave the country for a personal purpose," she said. The crowd roared. Mr. Sanford said he had not heard what she said. "She went there, Governor," said Brendan Clark, a local news anchor and one of three moderators. The special election on May 7 in the First Congressional District is the first time in several decades that a Democrat stands a strong chance of taking the seat in a district made up largely of moderate conservatives, many of whom are more moderate than the rest of the state. For South Carolinians, more than 500 of whom packed an auditorium at the Citadel on Monday night, the debate was the first opportunity they had to watch the candidates faces off in what has thus far been a race big on drama and light on actual issues. The drama, of course, centers on Mr. Sanford. His campaign began with several public apologies for mistakes he made in his personal life and a plea for redemption. He quickly shifted into making the race about his experience and strong fiscal conservatism, but in mid-April court documents surfaced that once again threw his personal life into the center of the ring. Mr. Sanford's ex-wife claimed that he had slipped into her house to watch the Super Bowl with their 14-year-old son in violation of court orders. She found him leaving the property, using his cellphone as a flashlight, and complained to the courts that he had violated their divorce agreement. The two are scheduled to appear in court on May 9, two days after the election, to resolve the issue. That made any questions Monday night that hinted at his marital difficulties particularly of interest. Mr. Sanford, who faced impeachment and went through a divorce after he lied about hiking the Appalachian Trail when he went to visit an Argentine woman who is now his fiancée, used that experience in the debate to explain how he would reach across the aisle to improve Congressional relations. "You don't go through the experience I had back in 2009 without a greater level of humility," he said. Mr. Sanford, who held the seat before he was governor and voted to impeach President Bill Clinton over the Monica Lewinsky affair, was asked if he would cast the same vote again. He did not answer directly, but said, "Do you think that President Clinton should be condemned for the rest of his life based on a mistake he made in his life?" Mrs. Colbert Busch, who began the evening debating with much less political polish than Mr. Sanford, promised by the end of the evening to take a 10 percent pay cut if she was elected to Congress. She called Mr. Sanford "Henny Penny" for his dire predictions on the nation's fiscal health, and took a more optimistic stance. "Our best days are ahead of us," she said. She cited former Vice President Dick Cheney's words when she was asked her position on gay marriage and the Defense of Marriage Act, both of which are in front of the Supreme Court. "Freedom means freedom for everyone," she said. Mr. Sanford, citing his deep belief in federalism, said marriage was an issue that traditionally had been left to the states and should remain so. "Isn't that really the way it's supposed to work in the country?" he asked. Mr. Sanford stayed close to his advocacy for limited federal spending that made him a hero among the fiscal hawks. Mrs. Colbert Busch stressed her own fiscal abilities honed as an executive in the maritime industry. Mr. Sanford also hammered Mrs. Colbert Busch over what will probably be more than a million dollars in support from national Democratic groups, including the House Majority PAC, which is backed by the minority leader Nancy Pelosi. Mr. Sanford used Mrs. Pelosi's name with such frequency that several people following the debate on Twitter suggested someone start a drinking game. His point, which he made repeatedly, was that Mrs. Colbert Busch, the sister of the comedian Stephen Colbert, would be controlled by special interests, including labor unions, once she got to Washington. "Nobody tells me what to do," she snapped back at one point, "except the people of South Carolina's First District."